





Echinochloa <P. Beauv.>

      (1) Including Ornithospermum Dumoulin, Tema Adans. (2) Culms 40-360 cm
high. (3) Culms herbaceous. (4) Annual, or perennial. (5) Culms branched
above, or unbranched above. (6) Leaf blades not pseudopetiolate. (7) Culm
nodes glabrous. (10) Ligule present, or absent. (11) Ligule <when present,> a
fringe of hairs. (12) Plants bisexual, with bisexual spikelets. (13)
Inflorescence of spicate main branches <the spikelets often hispid>. (15)
Inflorescence not comprising ‘partial inflorescences’ and foliar organs. (16)
Spikelet-bearing axes persistent. (18) Spikelets <paired, or clustered in
little secondary racemelets>. (19) Spikelets secund. (26) Spikelets 2.3-7 mm
long. (27) Spikelets compressed dorsiventrally. (28) Spikelets falling with
the glumes. (30) Rachilla terminated by a female-fertile floret. (31) Hairy
callus absent. (32) Glumes present. (33) Glumes two. (34) Glumes very unequal.
(35) Glumes <(the upper)> shorter than the adjacent lemmas to long relative to
the adjacent lemmas. (36) Glumes awned, or awnless. (38) Upper glume 5 nerved,
or 7 nerved. (39) Spikelets with incomplete florets. (40) The incomplete
florets proximal to the female-fertile florets. (41) The proximal incomplete
florets 1. (42) The proximal incomplete florets male <<10%> rarely>, or
sterile. (43) The proximal lemmas awned, or awnless. (44) Female-fertile
florets 1. (45) Lemmas entire. (47) Lemmas awnless <obtuse to apiculate>. (52)
Lemmas non-carinate. (53) Lemmas with a clear germination flap. (54) Lemmas 5
nerved. (55) Palea present <the tip reflexed>. (56) Palea relatively long.
(57) Lodicules present. (58) Lodicules fleshy. (59) Lodicules glabrous. (60)
Stamens 3. (61) Ovary glabrous. (62) Stigmas 2. (63) Stigmas red pigmented.
(64) Fruit small. (65) Fruit smooth. (66) Hilum short. (67) Pericarp fused.
(68) C4. (69) Biochemical type NADP–ME <3 species>. (70) XyMS–. (71) Mesophyll
without arm cells. (72) Mesophyll without fusoids. (73) Midrib conspicuous.
(74) Midrib having a conventional arc of bundles. (75) Midrib with colourless
tissue adaxially. (76) Many of the smallest vascular bundles unaccompanied by
sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting inflorescence not as in maize. (78) Panicoideae.
(79) Panicodae. (84) Paniceae. (85) 30-40 species. (86) Holarctic,
Paleotropical, Neotropical, and Australian. (87) Metcalfe 1960; this project.
(89) Echinoch.


Anisopogon <R.Br.>

      (2) Culms 60-110 cm high. (3) Culms herbaceous. (4) <Oat-like>
perennial. (6) Leaf blades not pseudopetiolate. (7) Culm nodes glabrous. (8)
Leaf blades linear-lanceolate. (9) Leaf blades 2-3 mm wide. (10) Ligule
present. (11) Ligule a fringed membrane <the membrane short to relatively
long, hairy on the back>. (12) Plants bisexual, with bisexual spikelets. (13)
Inflorescence paniculate. (14) Inflorescence open. (15) Inflorescence not
comprising ‘partial inflorescences’ and foliar organs. (16) Spikelet-bearing
axes persistent. (19) Spikelets not secund. (20) Spikelets not in distinct
‘long-and-short’ combinations. (26) Spikelets 40-60 mm long. (27) Spikelets
compressed laterally. (28) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (30)
Rachilla prolonged beyond the uppermost female-fertile floret <the slender
prolongation 6-8 mm long, in the palea groove>. (31) Hairy callus present
<about 6 mm long, with dense, white hairs>. (32) Glumes present. (33) Glumes
two. (34) Glumes more or less equal <the upper slightly longer>. (35) Glumes
long relative to the adjacent lemmas. (36) Glumes awnless. (37) Glumes
non-carinate. (38) Upper glume 7-9 nerved. (39) Spikelets with female-fertile
florets only, or with incomplete florets <usually with a single, abortive
floret>. (40) The incomplete florets distal to the female-fertile florets.
(44) Female-fertile florets 1. (45) Lemmas incised. (47) Lemmas awned. (48)
Awns 3. (49) Awns from a sinus. (50) Awns geniculate. (51) Awns much longer
than the body of the lemma <up to 8 cm long>. (52) Lemmas non-carinate
<rounded on the back>. (53) Lemmas without a germination flap. (54) Lemmas 3
nerved. (55) Palea present. (56) Palea relatively long <narrow, lanceolate>.
(57) Lodicules present. (58) Lodicules membranous <two ‘stipoid’ and larger,
the third smaller and flimsier>. (59) Lodicules glabrous. (60) Stamens 3. (61)
Ovary hairy <sparingly so, towards the apex>. (62) Stigmas 2, or 3. (63)
Stigmas white. (64) Fruit medium sized. (65) Fruit smooth. (66) Hilum
long-linear. (67) Pericarp free, or loosely adherent. (68) C3. (70) XyMS+.
(71) Mesophyll without arm cells. (72) Mesophyll without fusoids. (73) Midrib
not readily distinguishable. (74) Midrib with one bundle only. (75) Midrib
without colourless tissue adaxially. (76) All the vascular bundles accompanied
by sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting inflorescence not as in maize. (78)
Arundinoideae. (82) Stipeae. (85) 1 species. (86) Australian. (87) This
project. (89) Anisopog.


Bambusa <Schreber>

      (1) Including Arundarbor Kuntze, Bonia Balansa, Criciuma Soderstrom &
Londoño, Dendrocalamopsis (Chia & Fung) Keng f., Eremocaulon Soderstrom &
Londoño, Guadua Kunth, Ischurochloa Büse, Leleba Nakai, Lingnania McClure,
Tetragonocalamus Nakai – cf. Clayton and Renvoize (1986). Soderstrom and Ellis
(1987) refer Criciuma, Eremocaulon and Guadua to their subtribe Guaduinae,
along with Olmeca, and place Tetragonocalamus in the Arundinariinae, but
revised generic descriptions adequate for the present purpose are not
available. (2) Culms (200-)500-3500 cm high. (3) Culms woody and persistent.
(4) Perennial. (5) Culms branched above. (6) Leaf blades pseudopetiolate. (7)
Culm nodes glabrous. (10) Ligule present. (11) Ligule an unfringed membrane to
a fringed membrane. (12) Plants bisexual, with bisexual spikelets. (13)
Inflorescence <of pseudospikelets, these solitary or in tufts, fascicles or
capitula on leafless branches>. (14) Inflorescence open. (15) Inflorescence a
complex of ‘partial inflorescences’ and intervening foliar organs. (16)
Spikelet-bearing axes persistent. (19) Spikelets not secund. (20) Spikelets
not in distinct ‘long-and-short’ combinations. (26) Spikelets 10-80 mm long.
(27) Spikelets compressed laterally to not noticeably compressed. (28)
Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (29) Spikelets disarticulating
between the florets. (30) Rachilla prolonged beyond the uppermost
female-fertile floret. (31) Hairy callus absent. (32) Glumes present. (33)
Glumes two. (34) Glumes more or less equal. (35) Glumes shorter than the
adjacent lemmas. (36) Glumes awnless. (37) Glumes carinate. (38) Upper glume
7-18 nerved. (39) Spikelets with incomplete florets. (40) The incomplete
florets distal to the female-fertile florets, or both distal and proximal to
the female-fertile florets. (41) The proximal incomplete florets 0-3 <? –
fewer than 4>. (42) The proximal incomplete florets sterile. (43) The proximal
lemmas awnless. (44) Female-fertile florets 1-20 <–‘many’>. (45) Lemmas
entire. (46) Lemmas blunt. (47) Lemmas awnless <usually>, or mucronate
<Guadua>. (52) Lemmas carinate to non-carinate. (54) Lemmas 9-22 nerved. (55)
Palea present. (56) Palea relatively long. (57) Lodicules present. (58)
Lodicules membranous. (59) Lodicules ciliate. (60) Stamens 6. (61) Ovary
hairy. (62) Stigmas 3 <usually?>. (65) Fruit smooth. (66) Hilum long-linear.
(67) Pericarp fused. (68) C3. (70) XyMS+. (71) Mesophyll with arm cells. (72)
Mesophyll with fusoids. (73) Midrib conspicuous. (74) Midrib having complex
vascularization. (75) Midrib without colourless tissue adaxially. (76) All the
vascular bundles accompanied by sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting inflorescence not
as in maize. (78) Bambusoideae. (79) Bambusodae. (81) Bambuseae. (85) <About>
120 species. (86) Holarctic, Paleotropical, Neotropical, and Australian. (87)
Metcalfe 1960; this project. (89) Bambusa.


Chloris <O. Swartz>

      (1) Including Actinochloris Steud., Agrostomia Cerv., Apogon Steud.,
Chloridopsis Hack., Chloropsis Kuntze, Chlorostis Raf., Geopogon Steud.,
Heterolepis Boiss., Leptochloris Kuntze, Phacellaria Steud., Trichloris Benth.
(2) Culms 10-300 cm high. (3) Culms herbaceous. (4) Annual, or perennial. (6)
Leaf blades not pseudopetiolate. (7) Culm nodes glabrous. (8) Leaf blades
linear. (10) Ligule present. (11) Ligule a fringed membrane to a fringe of
hairs. (12) Plants bisexual, with bisexual spikelets. (13) Inflorescence of
spicate main branches <rarely a single raceme>. (15) Inflorescence not
comprising ‘partial inflorescences’ and foliar organs. (16) Spikelet-bearing
axes persistent. (18) Spikelets solitary, or paired. (19) Spikelets secund <on
the dorsiventral rachis>. (20) Spikelets not in distinct ‘long-and-short’
combinations. (26) Spikelets 1.8-5.5 mm long. (27) Spikelets compressed
laterally. (28) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes <the glumes usually
persistent>. (30) Rachilla prolonged beyond the uppermost female-fertile
floret. (31) Hairy callus present <usually minute>. (32) Glumes present. (33)
Glumes two. (34) Glumes very unequal <divergent>. (35) Glumes <(the longer)
usually> shorter than the adjacent lemmas. (36) Glumes awnless. (38) Upper
glume 1-4 nerved. (39) Spikelets with incomplete florets. (40) The incomplete
florets distal to the female-fertile florets <at least one of these
conspicuous – the spikelet ‘with two florets’>. (44) Female-fertile florets 1
<rarely 2>. (45) Lemmas entire <truncate>, or incised. (47) Lemmas awned. (48)
Awns 1 <usually>, or 3 <<5%>>. (49) Awns from a sinus, or apical. (50) Awns
non-geniculate. (52) Lemmas carinate. (53) Lemmas without a germination flap.
(54) Lemmas 1-7 nerved. (55) Palea present. (56) Palea relatively long. (57)
Lodicules present. (58) Lodicules fleshy. (59) Lodicules glabrous. (60)
Stamens 3. (61) Ovary glabrous. (62) Stigmas 2. (63) Stigmas white, or red
pigmented. (64) Fruit small. (65) Fruit smooth. (66) Hilum short. (67)
Pericarp free to fused. (68) C4. (69) Biochemical type PCK <6 species>. (70)
XyMS+. (71) Mesophyll without arm cells. (72) Mesophyll without fusoids. (73)
Midrib conspicuous. (74) Midrib with one bundle only, or having a conventional
arc of bundles. (75) Midrib with colourless tissue adaxially, or without
colourless tissue adaxially. (76) Many of the smallest vascular bundles
unaccompanied by sclerenchyma, or all the vascular bundles accompanied by
sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting inflorescence not as in maize. (78) Chloridoideae.
(83) Main chloridoid assemblage. (85) <About> 55 species. (86) Holarctic,
Paleotropical, Neotropical, and Australian. (87) Metcalfe 1960; this project.
(89) Chloris.


Cynodon <Rich.>

      (1) Including Capriola Adans., Dactilon Vill., Fibichia Koel. (2) Culms
4-60(-100) cm high. (3) Culms herbaceous. (4) Perennial. (6) Leaf blades not
pseudopetiolate. (7) Culm nodes glabrous. (8) Leaf blades linear <test>. (10)
Ligule present. (11) Ligule a fringed membrane to a fringe of hairs. (12)
Plants bisexual, with bisexual spikelets. (13) Inflorescence of spicate main
branches. (15) Inflorescence not comprising ‘partial inflorescences’ and
foliar organs. (16) Spikelet-bearing axes persistent. (18) Spikelets solitary.
(19) Spikelets secund. (26) Spikelets 1.7-3 mm long. (27) Spikelets compressed
laterally. (28) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes, or disarticulating
between the glumes. (30) Rachilla prolonged beyond the uppermost
female-fertile floret, or terminated by a female-fertile floret <C.
incompletus>. (31) Hairy callus absent. (32) Glumes present. (33) Glumes two.
(34) Glumes very unequal to more or less equal. (35) Glumes shorter than the
adjacent lemmas. (36) Glumes awnless. (37) Glumes carinate. (38) Upper glume 1
nerved, or 1-3 nerved. (39) Spikelets with female-fertile florets only
<normally>, or with incomplete florets. (40) The incomplete florets <(when
present)> distal to the female-fertile florets. (44) Female-fertile florets 1.
(45) Lemmas entire. (46) Lemmas pointed, or blunt. (47) Lemmas awnless. (52)
Lemmas carinate. (54) Lemmas 1-4 nerved. (55) Palea present. (56) Palea
relatively long. (57) Lodicules present. (58) Lodicules fleshy. (59) Lodicules
glabrous. (60) Stamens 3. (61) Ovary glabrous. (62) Stigmas 2. (63) Stigmas
red pigmented. (64) Fruit small. (65) Fruit smooth. (66) Hilum short. (67)
Pericarp fused. (68) C4. (69) Biochemical type NAD–ME <2 species>. (70) XyMS+.
(71) Mesophyll without arm cells. (72) Mesophyll without fusoids. (73) Midrib
conspicuous. (74) Midrib with one bundle only, or having a conventional arc of
bundles. (75) Midrib without colourless tissue adaxially. (76) All the
vascular bundles accompanied by sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting inflorescence not
as in maize. (78) Chloridoideae. (83) Main chloridoid assemblage. (85) 10
species. (86) Holarctic, Paleotropical, Neotropical, Cape, Australian, and
Antarctic. (87) This project. (89) Cynodon.


Andropogon <L.>

      (1) Including Anatherum P. Beauv., Arthrostachys Desv., Arthrolophis
(Trin.) Chiov., Dimeiostemon Raf., Eriopodium Hochst., Heterochloa Desv.,
Homoeatherum Nees, Leptopogon Roberty. (2) Culms 8-250(-430) cm high. (3)
Culms herbaceous. (4) Annual, or perennial. (5) Culms branched above, or
unbranched above. (6) Leaf blades pseudopetiolate, or not pseudopetiolate. (8)
Leaf blades linear. (10) Ligule present. (11) Ligule an unfringed membrane to
a fringed membrane. (12) Plants bisexual, with bisexual spikelets. (13)
Inflorescence of spicate main branches, or paniculate <usually with paired or
digitate ‘racemes’, these often spatheate and aggregated into false panicles>.
(15) Inflorescence a complex of ‘partial inflorescences’ and intervening
foliar organs <often>, or not comprising ‘partial inflorescences’ and foliar
organs. (16) Spikelet-bearing axes disarticulating. (17) Spikelet-bearing axes
disarticulating at the joints. (18) Spikelets paired. (20) Spikelets
consistently in ‘long-and-short’ combinations. (21) Spikelets in
pedicellate/sessile combinations. (22) Pedicels of the ‘pedicellate’ spikelets
free of the rachis. (23) The ‘shorter’ spikelets hermaphrodite. (24) The
‘longer’ spikelets male-only, or sterile <sometimes reduced to their
pedicels>. (25) The pedicelled spikelets male or barren, usually awnless,
occasionally suppressed. (27) Spikelets compressed laterally, or not
noticeably compressed, or compressed dorsiventrally. (28) Spikelets falling
with the glumes. (30) Rachilla terminated by a female-fertile floret. (31)
Hairy callus present. (32) Glumes present. (33) Glumes two. (34) Glumes more
or less equal. (35) Glumes long relative to the adjacent lemmas. (36) Glumes
awned, or awnless <G2 sometimes aristate>. (38) Upper glume 1-3 nerved. (39)
Spikelets with incomplete florets. (40) The incomplete florets proximal to the
female-fertile florets. (41) The proximal incomplete florets 1. (42) The
proximal incomplete florets sterile. (43) The proximal lemmas awnless. (44)
Female-fertile florets 1. (45) Lemmas incised <usually bifid>. (47) Lemmas
awned. (48) Awns 1. (49) Awns from a sinus. (50) Awns geniculate. (51) Awns
about as long as the body of the lemma to much longer than the body of the
lemma. (52) Lemmas non-carinate. (54) Lemmas 1-3 nerved. (55) Palea present.
(56) Palea very reduced <hyaline>. (57) Lodicules present <tiny>. (58)
Lodicules fleshy. (59) Lodicules ciliate, or glabrous. (60) Stamens 1-3. (61)
Ovary glabrous. (62) Stigmas 2. (64) Fruit small. (65) Fruit smooth. (66)
Hilum short. (67) Pericarp fused. (68) C4. (69) Biochemical type NADP–ME <3
species>. (70) XyMS–. (71) Mesophyll without arm cells. (72) Mesophyll without
fusoids. (73) Midrib conspicuous. (74) Midrib having a conventional arc of
bundles. (75) Midrib with colourless tissue adaxially. (76) Many of the
smallest vascular bundles unaccompanied by sclerenchyma, or all the vascular
bundles accompanied by sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting inflorescence not as in
maize. (78) Panicoideae. (79) Andropogonodae. (84) Andropogoneae. (85) <About>
100 species. (86) Holarctic, Paleotropical, Neotropical, and Cape. (87)
Metcalfe 1960; this project. (89) Andropog.


Agrostis <L.>

      (1) Including Agraulus P. Beauv., Agrestis Bub., Anomalotis Steud.,
Bromidium Nees, Candollea Steud., Chaetotropis Kunth, Decandolea Batard,
Didymochaeta Steud., Lachnagrostis Trin., Neoschischkinia Tsvelev, Notonema
Raf., Pentatherum Nabelek, Podagrostis (Griseb.) Scribn., Senisetum Koidz.,
Trichodium Michaux, Vilfa Adans. (2) Culms <mostly> (3-)5-100 cm high. (3)
Culms herbaceous. (4) Annual, or perennial. (5) Culms unbranched above. (6)
Leaf blades not pseudopetiolate. (7) Culm nodes glabrous. (8) Leaf blades
linear. (9) Leaf blades 0.2-10 mm wide. (10) Ligule present. (11) Ligule an
unfringed membrane. (12) Plants bisexual, with bisexual spikelets. (13)
Inflorescence paniculate. (14) Inflorescence open, or contracted <e.g.,
Bromidium>. (15) Inflorescence not comprising ‘partial inflorescences’ and
foliar organs. (16) Spikelet-bearing axes persistent. (19) Spikelets not
secund. (20) Spikelets not in distinct ‘long-and-short’ combinations. (26)
Spikelets 0.8-4 mm long. (27) Spikelets compressed laterally. (28) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes. (30) Rachilla prolonged beyond the uppermost
female-fertile floret, or terminated by a female-fertile floret. (31) Hairy
callus present <the hairs less than 0.5 mm long>, or absent. (32) Glumes
present. (33) Glumes two. (34) Glumes more or less equal. (35) Glumes long
relative to the adjacent lemmas. (36) Glumes awnless. (37) Glumes carinate, or
non-carinate. (38) Upper glume 1 nerved. (39) Spikelets with female-fertile
florets only. (44) Female-fertile florets 1. (45) Lemmas entire to incised
<usually truncate or emarginate, sometimes toothed via excurrent veins>. (47)
Lemmas awnless, or mucronate, or awned. (48) Awns <when present,> 1, or 3
<Bromidium>, or 5 <rarely>. (49) Awns dorsal. (50) Awns geniculate. (51) Awns
much shorter than the body of the lemma to about as long as the body of the
lemma, or much longer than the body of the lemma <<2%> rarely>. (52) Lemmas
non-carinate. (53) Lemmas without a germination flap. (54) Lemmas 3-5 nerved.
(55) Palea <nearly always> present. (56) Palea relatively long, or conspicuous
but relatively short, or very reduced. (57) Lodicules present. (58) Lodicules
membranous. (59) Lodicules glabrous. (60) Stamens 3. (61) Ovary glabrous. (62)
Stigmas 2. (63) Stigmas white. (64) Fruit small. (65) Fruit smooth. (66) Hilum
short. (67) Pericarp fused. (68) C3. (70) XyMS+. (71) Mesophyll without arm
cells. (72) Mesophyll without fusoids. (73) Midrib conspicuous, or not readily
distinguishable. (74) Midrib with one bundle only. (75) Midrib without
colourless tissue adaxially. (76) Many of the smallest vascular bundles
unaccompanied by sclerenchyma, or all the vascular bundles accompanied by
sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting inflorescence not as in maize. (78) Pooideae. (79)
Poodae. (80) Aveneae. (85) <About> 220 species. (86) Holarctic, Paleotropical,
Neotropical, Cape, Australian, and Antarctic. (87) Metcalfe 1960; this
project. (89) Agrostis.


Eleusine <Gaertn.>

      (2) Culms 10-150 cm high. (3) Culms herbaceous. (4) Annual, or perennial
<the culms flattened>. (6) Leaf blades not pseudopetiolate. (7) Culm nodes
glabrous. (8) Leaf blades linear. (10) Ligule present. (11) Ligule a fringed
membrane. (12) Plants bisexual, with bisexual spikelets. (13) Inflorescence of
spicate main branches. (14) Inflorescence open, or contracted <sometimes
forming a capitulum>. (15) Inflorescence not comprising ‘partial
inflorescences’ and foliar organs. (16) Spikelet-bearing axes persistent. (19)
Spikelets secund. (26) Spikelets 3.5-11 mm long. (27) Spikelets compressed
laterally. (28) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes, or not
disarticulating <E. coracana>. (29) Spikelets disarticulating between the
florets <except in E. coracana>. (30) Rachilla prolonged beyond the uppermost
female-fertile floret. (31) Hairy callus absent. (32) Glumes present. (33)
Glumes two. (34) Glumes very unequal. (35) Glumes shorter than the adjacent
lemmas. (36) Glumes awnless. (37) Glumes carinate. (38) Upper glume 3-5(-7)
nerved. (39) Spikelets with female-fertile florets only, or with incomplete
florets. (40) The incomplete florets distal to the female-fertile florets.
(44) Female-fertile florets 3-15. (45) Lemmas entire. (46) Lemmas pointed, or
blunt. (47) Lemmas awnless to mucronate. (52) Lemmas carinate. (54) Lemmas 3
nerved. (55) Palea present. (57) Lodicules present. (58) Lodicules fleshy, or
membranous. (59) Lodicules glabrous. (60) Stamens 3. (61) Ovary glabrous. (62)
Stigmas 2. (63) Stigmas white, or brown. (64) Fruit small <0.9-2 mm long>.
(65) Fruit sculptured. (66) Hilum short. (67) Pericarp free. (68) C4. (69)
Biochemical type NAD–ME <2 species>. (70) XyMS+. (71) Mesophyll without arm
cells. (72) Mesophyll without fusoids. (73) Midrib conspicuous. (74) Midrib
with one bundle only. (75) Midrib without colourless tissue adaxially. (76)
All the vascular bundles accompanied by sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting
inflorescence not as in maize. (78) Chloridoideae. (83) Main chloridoid
assemblage. (85) 9 species. (86) Holarctic, Paleotropical, Neotropical, Cape,
and Antarctic. (87) Metcalfe 1960; this project. (89) Eleusine.


Festuca <L.>

      (1) Including Amphigenes Janka, Anatherum Nabelek, Argillochloa Weber,
Bucetum Parnell, Drymochloa Holub, Drymonaetes Fourr., Festucaria Fabric.,
Gnomonia Lunell, Gramen Krause, Hellerochloa Rauschert, Leiopoa Ohwi,
Lojaconoa Gand., Nabelekia Roshev., Wasatchia M. E. Jones. (2) Culms 2-200 cm
high. (3) Culms herbaceous. (4) Perennial. (5) Culms unbranched above. (6)
Leaf blades not pseudopetiolate. (7) Culm nodes glabrous. (8) Leaf blades
linear to linear-lanceolate. (9) Leaf blades 0.2-15 mm wide. (10) Ligule
present. (11) Ligule an unfringed membrane <sometimes ciliolate>. (12) Plants
bisexual, with bisexual spikelets <Leucopoa being excluded>. (13)
Inflorescence paniculate. (14) Inflorescence open <usually>, or contracted
<<15%> rarely>. (15) Inflorescence not comprising ‘partial inflorescences’ and
foliar organs. (16) Spikelet-bearing axes persistent. (19) Spikelets not
secund. (20) Spikelets not in distinct ‘long-and-short’ combinations. (26)
Spikelets 3-20 mm long. (27) Spikelets compressed laterally. (28) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes. (29) Spikelets disarticulating between the
florets. (30) Rachilla prolonged beyond the uppermost female-fertile floret.
(31) Hairy callus absent. (32) Glumes present. (33) Glumes two. (34) Glumes
very unequal. (35) Glumes shorter than the adjacent lemmas. (36) Glumes
awnless. (37) Glumes carinate to non-carinate. (38) Upper glume (1-)3-5
nerved. (39) Spikelets with incomplete florets. (40) The incomplete florets
distal to the female-fertile florets. (44) Female-fertile florets 2-14 <rarely
1>. (45) Lemmas entire, or incised. (46) Lemmas <when entire> pointed, or
blunt. (47) Lemmas awnless, or mucronate, or awned. (48) Awns <when present,>
1. (49) Awns from a sinus, or apical. (50) Awns non-geniculate. (51) Awns much
shorter than the body of the lemma <usually>, or about as long as the body of
the lemma <sometimes, rarely somewhat longer>. (52) Lemmas non-carinate. (54)
Lemmas 3-7 nerved. (55) Palea present. (56) Palea relatively long. (57)
Lodicules present. (58) Lodicules membranous. (59) Lodicules ciliate, or
glabrous. (60) Stamens 3. (61) Ovary glabrous, or hairy. (62) Stigmas 2. (63)
Stigmas white. (64) Fruit small, or medium sized, or large. (65) Fruit smooth.
(66) Hilum long-linear <usually about as long as the grain, but sometimes
elliptical and only half as long>. (67) Pericarp fused. (68) C3. (70) XyMS+.
(71) Mesophyll without arm cells. (72) Mesophyll without fusoids. (73) Midrib
conspicuous, or not readily distinguishable. (74) Midrib with one bundle only.
(75) Midrib without colourless tissue adaxially. (76) Many of the smallest
vascular bundles unaccompanied by sclerenchyma, or all the vascular bundles
accompanied by sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting inflorescence not as in maize. (78)
Pooideae. (79) Poodae. (80) Poeae. (85) 360 species <or more>. (86) Holarctic,
Paleotropical, Neotropical, Cape, Australian, and Antarctic. (87) Metcalfe
1960; this project; Aiken et al. 1985. (89) Festuca.


Oryza <L.>

      (1) Including Padia Moritzi. (2) Culms 30-300 cm high. (3) Culms
herbaceous. (4) Annual, or perennial. (6) Leaf blades pseudopetiolate, or not
pseudopetiolate. (7) Culm nodes glabrous. (8) Leaf blades linear to
linear-lanceolate. (10) Ligule present. (11) Ligule an unfringed membrane.
(12) Plants bisexual, with bisexual spikelets. (13) Inflorescence paniculate
<axes usually wavy, the spikelets appressed>, or of spicate main branches <the
primary branches often reduced to racemes>. (14) Inflorescence open. (15)
Inflorescence not comprising ‘partial inflorescences’ and foliar organs. (16)
Spikelet-bearing axes persistent. (19) Spikelets not secund. (20) Spikelets
not in distinct ‘long-and-short’ combinations. (26) Spikelets 4-12 mm long.
(27) Spikelets <strongly> compressed laterally. (28) Spikelets disarticulating
above the glumes <i.e. above the pedicel cup representing them>, or not
applicable. (30) Rachilla terminated by a female-fertile floret. (31) Hairy
callus absent. (32) Glumes present to absent <represented only by a small
2-lobed cupule>. (33) Glumes <if present,> two. (34) Glumes more or less
equal. (35) Glumes shorter than the adjacent lemmas. (36) Glumes awnless. (38)
Upper glume 0 nerved. (39) Spikelets with incomplete florets. (40) The
incomplete florets proximal to the female-fertile florets. (41) The proximal
incomplete florets 2 <small, vestigial, no more than half the spikelet length,
sometimes only bristles>. (42) The proximal incomplete florets sterile. (43)
The proximal lemmas awnless. (44) Female-fertile florets 1. (45) Lemmas
entire. (46) Lemmas pointed. (47) Lemmas awnless, or mucronate, or awned. (48)
Awns <when present,> 1. (49) Awns apical. (50) Awns non-geniculate. (51) Awns
much shorter than the body of the lemma to much longer than the body of the
lemma. (52) Lemmas <strongly> carinate. (54) Lemmas 3-9 nerved. (55) Palea
present. (56) Palea relatively long <but narrower than the lemma>. (57)
Lodicules present. (58) Lodicules membranous <but the membranous flange may be
narrow>. (59) Lodicules glabrous. (60) Stamens 6. (61) Ovary glabrous. (62)
Stigmas 2. (64) Fruit small, or medium sized, or large. (65) Fruit smooth.
(66) Hilum long-linear. (67) Pericarp fused. (68) C3. (70) XyMS+. (71)
Mesophyll with arm cells. (72) Mesophyll without fusoids. (73) Midrib
conspicuous. (74) Midrib having complex vascularization. (75) Midrib without
colourless tissue adaxially. (76) All the vascular bundles accompanied by
sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting inflorescence not as in maize. (78) Bambusoideae.
(79) Oryzodae. (81) Oryzeae. (85) 25 species. (86) Holarctic, Paleotropical,
and Neotropical. (87) Metcalfe 1960; this project. (89) Oryza.


Panicum <L.>

      (1) Including Chasea Nieuw., Coleataenia Griseb., Dileucaden (Raf.)
Steud., Eatonia Raf., Eriolytrum Kunth, Milium Adans., Monachne P. Beauv.,
Phanopyrum (Raf.) Nash, Polyneura Peter, Psilochloa Launert, Setiacis S.L.
Chen and Y.X. Jin (? – original description inadequate). (2) Culms 20-400 cm
high. (3) Culms woody and persistent, or herbaceous. (4) Annual, or perennial
<but no overwintering rosette – by contrast with Dichanthelium>. (5) Culms
branched above, or unbranched above. (6) Leaf blades pseudopetiolate <<2%>
rarely>, or not pseudopetiolate. (7) Culm nodes hairy, or glabrous. (10)
Ligule present. (11) Ligule an unfringed membrane, or a fringed membrane to a
fringe of hairs. (12) Plants bisexual, with bisexual spikelets. (13)
Inflorescence paniculate <except in the Stolonifera group, where it consists
of racemes and the distinction from Brachiaria breaks down>. (14)
Inflorescence open, or contracted. (15) Inflorescence not comprising ‘partial
inflorescences’ and foliar organs. (16) Spikelet-bearing axes persistent. (19)
Spikelets not secund <except the American Agrostoidea group, ‘Psilochloa’,
etc.>. (20) Spikelets not in distinct ‘long-and-short’ combinations. (26)
Spikelets 1.4-6 mm long. (27) Spikelets compressed dorsiventrally <with very
few exceptions: e.g. P. hemitomum>. (28) Spikelets falling with the glumes, or
not disarticulating. (30) Rachilla terminated by a female-fertile floret <very
rarely prolonged, e.g. occasionally in P. heliophilum: Zuloaga and Morone
1991>. (31) Hairy callus absent. (32) Glumes present. (33) Glumes two. (34)
Glumes <nearly always> very unequal. (35) Glumes <(the longer)> long relative
to the adjacent lemmas. (36) Glumes <nearly always> awnless <the G2 truncate
to pointed, very rarely shortly awn-tipped>. (38) Upper glume 3-9 nerved. (39)
Spikelets <nearly always> with incomplete florets. (40) The incomplete florets
proximal to the female-fertile florets. (41) The proximal incomplete florets 1
<rarely 2>. (42) The proximal incomplete florets male, or sterile. (43) The
proximal lemmas awnless. (44) Female-fertile florets 1. (45) Lemmas entire.
(46) Lemmas pointed, or blunt. (47) Lemmas awnless <rarely minutely
apiculate>. (52) Lemmas non-carinate. (53) Lemmas with a clear germination
flap. (54) Lemmas 3-11 nerved. (55) Palea present. (56) Palea relatively long.
(57) Lodicules present. (58) Lodicules fleshy. (59) Lodicules glabrous. (60)
Stamens 3. (61) Ovary glabrous. (62) Stigmas 2. (63) Stigmas red pigmented.
(64) Fruit small. (65) Fruit smooth. (66) Hilum short <linear in (e.g.) P.
glutinosum, P. macranthum, P. pilgerianum = Psilochloa>. (67) Pericarp fused.
(68) C4, or C3. (69) Biochemical type PCK <5 species>, or NAD–ME <14 species>,
or NADP–ME <4 species>. (70) <When biochemically tested,> XyMS+ <C3, or C4
NAD-ME or PCK>, or XyMS– <NADP-ME>. (71) Mesophyll without arm cells. (72)
Mesophyll without fusoids. (73) Midrib conspicuous, or not readily
distinguishable. (74) Midrib with one bundle only, or having a conventional
arc of bundles. (75) Midrib with colourless tissue adaxially, or without
colourless tissue adaxially. (76) Many of the smallest vascular bundles
unaccompanied by sclerenchyma, or all the vascular bundles accompanied by
sclerenchyma <rarely>. (77) Fruiting inflorescence not as in maize. (78)
Panicoideae. (79) Panicodae. (84) Paniceae. (85) <About> 370 species. (86)
Holarctic, Paleotropical, Neotropical, Australian, and Antarctic. (87) Mainly
Metcalfe 1960 and this project. (89) Panicum.


Phragmites <Adans.>

      (1) Including Czernya Presl, Miphragtes Nieuwland, Oxyanthe Steud.,
Trichoon Roth, Xenochloa Roem. & Schult. (2) Culms 60-400 cm high <–1000 cm>.
(3) Culms woody and persistent to herbaceous <often somewhat persistent>. (4)
Perennial. (5) Culms branched above <especially when main culm damaged>, or
unbranched above. (6) Leaf blades not pseudopetiolate. (7) Culm nodes
glabrous. (8) Leaf blades linear-lanceolate to lanceolate. (9) Leaf blades
6-50 mm wide. (10) Ligule present. (11) Ligule a fringe of hairs. (12) Plants
bisexual, with bisexual spikelets. (13) Inflorescence paniculate. (14)
Inflorescence open <20-60 cm long, plumose, the fertile lemmas surrounded by
long white silky hairs>. (15) Inflorescence not comprising ‘partial
inflorescences’ and foliar organs. (16) Spikelet-bearing axes persistent. (19)
Spikelets not secund. (20) Spikelets not in distinct ‘long-and-short’
combinations. (26) Spikelets 9-16 mm long. (27) Spikelets compressed
laterally. (28) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes <at least above the
L1>. (29) Spikelets disarticulating between the florets. (30) Rachilla
prolonged beyond the uppermost female-fertile floret. (31) Hairy callus
present <with long fine silky hairs>. (32) Glumes present. (33) Glumes two.
(34) Glumes very unequal. (35) Glumes shorter than the adjacent lemmas. (36)
Glumes awnless. (37) Glumes non-carinate <rounded on the back>. (38) Upper
glume 3-5 nerved. (39) Spikelets with incomplete florets. (40) The incomplete
florets both distal and proximal to the female-fertile florets. (41) The
proximal incomplete florets 1. (42) The proximal incomplete florets male <the
stamens often 2>, or sterile. (43) The proximal lemmas awnless. (44)
Female-fertile florets (2-)3-10. (45) Lemmas entire. (46) Lemmas pointed
<acute to acuminate or aristulate>. (47) Lemmas awnless, or awned
<narrow-attenuate, muticous to aristulate>. (48) Awns <(if lemmas aristulate)>
1. (49) Awns apical. (50) Awns non-geniculate. (51) Awns much shorter than the
body of the lemma. (52) Lemmas non-carinate. (54) Lemmas 1-3 nerved. (55)
Palea present. (56) Palea conspicuous but relatively short. (57) Lodicules
present. (58) Lodicules fleshy. (59) Lodicules ciliate, or glabrous. (60)
Stamens 3. (61) Ovary glabrous. (62) Stigmas 2. (63) Stigmas brown. (64) Fruit
small. (65) Fruit smooth. (66) Hilum short. (67) Pericarp fused. (68) C3. (70)
XyMS+. (71) Mesophyll with arm cells. (72) Mesophyll without fusoids. (73)
Midrib conspicuous. (74) Midrib having a conventional arc of bundles. (75)
Midrib without colourless tissue adaxially. (76) All the vascular bundles
accompanied by sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting inflorescence not as in maize. (78)
Arundinoideae. (82) Arundineae. (85) 3 species. (86) Holarctic, Paleotropical,
Neotropical, Australian, and Antarctic. (87) Metcalfe 1960; this project. (89)
Phragmit.


Poa <L.>

      (1) Including Arctopoa (Griseb.) Probat., Neuropoa Clayton, Oreopoa
Grand., Paneion Lunell, Parodiochloa C.E. Hubb., Poagrostis Raf. (2) Culms
(1-)4-150 cm high. (3) Culms herbaceous. (4) Annual, or perennial. (5) Culms
unbranched above. (6) Leaf blades not pseudopetiolate. (8) Leaf blades linear,
or linear-lanceolate <often ending in a boat-shaped tip>. (9) Leaf blades
0.2-12 mm wide <rarely wider>. (10) Ligule present. (11) Ligule an unfringed
membrane, or a fringed membrane <<10%> rarely>. (12) Plants bisexual, with
bisexual spikelets <<95%>>, or dioecious <or gynodioecious, in subgenus
Andinae>. (13) Inflorescence paniculate. (14) Inflorescence open, or
contracted. (15) Inflorescence not comprising ‘partial inflorescences’ and
foliar organs. (16) Spikelet-bearing axes persistent. (19) Spikelets not
secund. (20) Spikelets not in distinct ‘long-and-short’ combinations. (26)
Spikelets 2-11 mm long. (27) Spikelets compressed laterally. (28) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes. (29) Spikelets disarticulating between the
florets. (30) Rachilla prolonged beyond the uppermost female-fertile floret.
(31) Hairy callus present, or absent. (32) Glumes present. (33) Glumes two.
(34) Glumes more or less equal, or very unequal to more or less equal <nearly
always ‘subequal’, with the G1 somewhat shorter>. (35) Glumes shorter than the
adjacent lemmas. (36) Glumes awnless. (37) Glumes carinate. (38) Upper glume
(1-)3(-5) nerved. (39) Spikelets with female-fertile florets only, or with
incomplete florets. (40) The incomplete florets distal to the female-fertile
florets. (44) Female-fertile florets (1-)2-13(-15) <the one-floreted species
very unusual, perhaps restricted to Malesia>. (45) Lemmas <nearly always>
entire <very rarely tridenticulate>. (46) Lemmas pointed. (47) Lemmas awnless,
or mucronate <2–3 mm terminal ‘awns’ in a very few species, e.g. in the
southern South American P. flabellata>. (52) Lemmas carinate. (53) Lemmas
without a germination flap. (54) Lemmas (3-)5 nerved, or 7-11 nerved <<2%>
rarely, e.g. in the Australian Neuropoa>. (55) Palea present. (56) Palea
relatively long, or conspicuous but relatively short. (57) Lodicules present.
(58) Lodicules membranous. (59) Lodicules <nearly always> glabrous
<occasionally ciliolate>. (60) Stamens 3. (61) Ovary glabrous. (62) Stigmas 2.
(63) Stigmas white. (64) Fruit small. (65) Fruit smooth. (66) Hilum short.
(67) Pericarp fused. (68) C3. (70) XyMS+. (71) Mesophyll without arm cells.
(72) Mesophyll without fusoids. (73) Midrib conspicuous. (74) Midrib with one
bundle only. (75) Midrib without colourless tissue adaxially. (76) Many of the
smallest vascular bundles unaccompanied by sclerenchyma, or all the vascular
bundles accompanied by sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting inflorescence not as in
maize. (78) Pooideae. (79) Poodae. (80) Poeae. (85) <About> 500 species. (86)
Holarctic, Paleotropical, Neotropical, Australian, and Antarctic. (87) Mainly
Metcalfe 1960; this project. (89) Poa.


Zea <L.>

      (1) Including Mays Miller, Mayzea Raf., Reana Brignoli, Thalysia Kuntze.
= Zea mays subsp. mays. (2) Culms 200-450 cm high. (3) Culms herbaceous. (4)
<Robust> annual. (6) Leaf blades not pseudopetiolate. (7) Culm nodes glabrous.
(10) Ligule present. (11) Ligule a fringed membrane. (12) Plants monoecious
with all the fertile spikelets unisexual. (13) Inflorescence <peculiar: the
female axillary, comprising a stout, spicate spadix with spikelets in few to
several longitudinal rows, terminating in a tuft of long pendulous styles
(‘silks’); the male spikelets in terminal panicles of spiciform ‘tassels’>.
(15) Inflorescence not comprising ‘partial inflorescences’ and foliar organs.
(16) Spikelet-bearing axes persistent. (18) Spikelets paired. (19) Spikelets
not secund. (20) Spikelets consistently in ‘long-and-short’ combinations
<male>, or not in distinct ‘long-and-short’ combinations <female>. (25) Male
spikelets in pairs, two-flowered, with many-nerved, membranous glumes. Lemmas
and paleas hyaline, the florets with three stamens and two cuneate lodicules.
(27) Spikelets not noticeably compressed to compressed dorsiventrally. (28)
Spikelets not disarticulating. (30) Rachilla terminated by a female-fertile
floret. (31) Hairy callus absent. (32) Glumes present. (33) Glumes two. (34)
Glumes more or less equal. (35) Glumes long relative to the adjacent lemmas.
(36) Glumes awnless. (38) Upper glume 0 nerved. (39) Spikelets with incomplete
florets. (40) The incomplete florets proximal to the female-fertile florets.
(41) The proximal incomplete florets 1. (42) The proximal incomplete florets
sterile. (43) The proximal lemmas awnless. (44) Female-fertile florets 1. (47)
Lemmas awnless. (52) Lemmas non-carinate. (54) Lemmas 3 nerved. (55) Palea
present. (56) Palea relatively long. (57) Lodicules absent. (60) Stamens 0.
(61) Ovary glabrous. (62) Stigmas 2 <at tip of style>. (63) Stigmas white to
red pigmented <or green>. (64) Fruit medium sized. (65) Fruit smooth. (66)
Hilum short. (67) Pericarp fused. (68) C4. (69) Biochemical type NADP–ME. (70)
XyMS–. (71) Mesophyll without arm cells. (72) Mesophyll without fusoids. (73)
Midrib conspicuous. (74) Midrib having a conventional arc of bundles. (75)
Midrib with colourless tissue adaxially. (76) Many of the smallest vascular
bundles unaccompanied by sclerenchyma. (77) Fruiting inflorescence a massive,
spatheate cob, the fruits in many rows. (78) Panicoideae. (79) Andropogonodae.
(84) Maydeae. (85) 1 species. (86) Neotropical. (87) Metcalfe 1960; this
project. (89) Zea.
