





Pteridophytes

      (1) Fern and fern-allies. (384) Represented by six species in our area.
(385) Represented by five genera in our area; Crystopteris. Dryopteris,
Woodsia, Equisetum, and Lycopodium. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428)
Expect fewer than 230 CAA records. (431) Code used for graphics files: pt.


Equisetaceae

      (1) Horsetail family. (2) Equisetaceae, horsetail family. (385)
Represented by three taxa in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics
files: eq.


Equisetum arvense <L.>

      (1) Common horsetail. (2) Equisetaceae, horsetail family. (7) Equisetum
avense var. alpestre Wahlenb. Equisetum avense var. boreale (Bong.) Rupr.
Equisetum arvense var. riparium Farw. Equisetum arvense var. calderi Boivin.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Possibly 30 eastern arctic records.
(431) Code used for graphics files: eqeqav.


Equisetum scirpoides <Michx>

      (2) Equisetaceae, horsetail family. (7) None. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (428) Two records on Baffin. 1998 collections from Ellesmere are
possibly new records. (431) Code used for graphics files: eqeqsc.


Equisetum variegatum <Schleich.>

      (2) Equisetaceae, horsetail family. (7) Equisetum variegatum var. anceps
Milde. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Widespread, possibly 30
collections. (431) Code used for graphics files: eqeqva.


Lycopodiaceae

      (1) Club-moss family. (2) Lycopodiaceae, club-moss family. (385)
Represented by two, possibly three species in the Arctic Archipelago. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics
files: ptly.


Huperzia selago var. selago <Bernh. ex Mart. & Schrank>

      (2) Lycopodiaceae, club-moss family. (7) Lycopodium selago L. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) This
name is preferred by Kartesz (1994). Be warned there are many varieties of
this taxon. Possibly 25 CAA records. (431) Code used for graphics files:
ptlyhu.


Lycopodium alpinum <L.>

      (2) Lycopodiaceae, club-moss family. (7) Diphasiastrum alpinum (L.)
Holub Diphgasium alpinum (L.) Rothm. (385) Low arctic and alpine, not yet
recorded in the Arctic Archipelago. Check there are no records. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: ptlyal.


Lycopodium annotinum <L.> var. annotinum

      (2) Lycopodiaceae, club-moss family. (424) Morphological data not coded.
(428) 5 records southern Baffin Island. (431) Code used for graphics files:
ptlyan.


Lycopodium selago <L.>

      (2) Lycopodiaceae, club-moss family. (7) Huperzia selago var. selago
Bernh. ex Mart. & Schrank. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status
under consideration. (431) Code used for graphics files: ptlyse.


Polypodiaceae

      (1) Fern family. (2) Polypodiaceae, fern family. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: ptpo.


Crystopteris <(L.) Bernh>

      (1) Bladder-fern. (2) Polypodiaceae, fern family. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (425) Genus. (431) Code used for graphics files: ptcr.


Cystopteris fragilis <(L.) Bernh.>

      (2) Polypodiaceae, fern family. (7) Cystopteris dickieana Sim
Cystopteris fragilis subsp. dickieana (Sim) Hyl. Cystopteris fragilis var.
woodsioides Christ Filix fragilis (L.) Underwood. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (428) Widespread, possibly 30 records. (431) Code used for graphics
files: ptcrfl.


Dryopteris fragrans <(L.) Schott.>

      (2) Polypodiaceae, fern family. (7) Dryopteris fragrans (L.) Schott.
var. fragrans. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Eastern Arctic, 15-20
records. (431) Code used for graphics files: ptdrfr.


Woodsia <R. Br.>

      (2) Polypodiaceae, fern family. (385) Represented by three species in
our area. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425) Genus. (431) Code used for
graphics files: ptwo.


Woodsia alpina <(Bolton) Gray>

      (2) Polypodiaceae, fern family. (7) Woodsia alpina var. bellii Lawson
Woodsia glabella R. Br. ex Richards. var. bellii (Lawson) Lawson. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (428) 4 records ub Oirsukd 1997. (431) Code used
for graphics files: ptwoal.


Woodsia glabella <R. Br.>

      (2) Polypodiaceae, fern family. (7) None. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (428) 10-15 records eastern Arctic. (431) Code used for graphics files:
ptwogl.


Woodsia ilvensis <(L.) R.Br.>

      (2) Polypodiaceae, fern family. (7) None. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (428) 2 records Baffin Island. (431) Code used for graphics files:
ptwoil.


Spermatophytes

      (1) Seed plants. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425) Class. (431)
Code used for graphics files: sper.


Asteraceae <Dumortier>

      (1) Daisy family. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Asteriflorae. (399) Dahlgren's
Order Asterales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Asteridae. (412) Cronquist's Order
Asterales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Asteridae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Asteranae. (420) Takhtajan's Order Asterales. (421) 13000 species. (422) 1150
genera. (423) Genera in study region: Antennaria Arnica, Artemisia, Aster,
Chrysantheumum, Crepis, Erigeron, Gnaphalium, Matricaria, Petasites, Senecio,
Solidago, Taraxacum. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431)
Code used for graphics files: as.


Antennaria <Gaertn.>

      (1) Everlasting. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: asan.


Antennaria angustata <Greene>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Anternnaria monocephala DC. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name put
into synonymy by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: asanan.


Antennaria alpina <(L.) Gaertn.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) A list of 32 names in synonymy . (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name
preferred by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: asanal.


Antennaria canescens <(Lge.) Malte>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Antennaria alpina (L.) Gaertn. 429,2
433name put into synonymy by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files:
asanca.


Antennaria compacta <Malte>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Antennaria alpina (L.) Gaertb, var.
compacta (Malte)Welsh Antennaria crymophila Porsild Antennaria friesiana
(Trautv.) Ekman. subsp. compacta (Malte) Hult‚n Antennaria subcanescens
Ostenf. ex Malte. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under
consideration. (431) Code used for graphics files: asanco.


Antennaria ekmaniana <(Lge.) Porsild>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Antennaria alpina (L.) Gaertn. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name in
synonymy by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: asanek.


Antennaria glabrata <(J.Vahl) Greene>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Anternnaria monocephala DC. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (428) Name put into synonymy by Kartesz 1994.
(431) Code used for graphics files: asanca.


Anternnaria monocephala <DC>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) # Antennaria angustata Greene
Antennaria glabrata (J.Vahl) Greene. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426)
Status under consideration. (428) Name preferred by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code
used for graphics files: asanmo.


Arnica alpina <(L.) Olin>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: asaral.


Artemisia <L.>

      (1) Wormwood. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: asarbo.


Artemisia borealis <Pall.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Artemisia campestris var. borealis
(Pallas) M.E. Peck Artemisia richardsoniana Bess. 429,2 431,3 433Name put into
synonymy by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: asarbo.


Artemisia campestris var. borealis <(Pallas) M.E. Peck>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Artemisia borealis Pall. Artemisia
richardsoniana Bess. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under
consideration. (428) Name preferred by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for
graphics files: asarca.


Artemesia furcata <Bieb.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Artemisia hypoborea Rydb. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name
preferred by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: asarfu.


Artemisia hyperborea <Rydb.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Artemesia furcata Bieb. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name
preferred by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: asarhy.


Artemisia richardsoniana <Bess.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Artemisia campestris var. borealis
(Pallas) M.E. Peck. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under
consideration. (428) Name put into synonymy by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used
for graphics files: asarri.


Artemisia tilesii <Ledeb.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428)
Several subspecies recognized by Kartesz. 1994. (431) Code used for graphics
files: asarti.


Aster pygmaeus <(Lindl.) Olin>

      (1) Aster. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Aster sibiricus var.
pygmaeus (Lindl.) Cody. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used
for graphics files: asaspy.


Aster sibiricus var. pygmaeus <(Lindl.) Cody>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Aster pygmaeus (Lindl.) Olin. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name
preferred by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: asassi.


Crepis nana <(L.) Olin>

      (1) Hawk's beard. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Crepis nana
subsp.nana Askellia nana (Richards) W.A. Weber Crepis nana subsp. typica
Babcock ICrepis nanaI var. lyratifolia (Turcz.) Hultén. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: ascrna.


Chrysanthemum arcticum <L.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: aschar.


Erigeron <L.>

      (1) Fleabane. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: aserer.


Erigeron compositus <Pursh>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Erigeron compositus var. discoideus
Gray Erigeron compositus var. glabratus Macoun Erigeron compositus var.
multifidus (Rydb.) J.F. Macbr. & Payson Erigeron compositus var. typicus Hook.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
aserco.


Erigeron eriocephalus <J. Vahl>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Erigeron uniflorus subsp. eriocephalus
(J. Vahl) Cronq. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under
consideration. (428) Name placed in synonymy by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used
for graphics files: aserer.


Erigeron grandiflorus <Hook.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Erigeron grandiflorus subsp. arcticus
Porsild . (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics
files: aserco.


Erigeron humilis <Graham>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Erigeron uniflorus subsp. eriocephalus
(J. Vahl) Cronq. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under
consideration. (428) Name preferred in Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for
graphics files: aserhu.


Erigeron unalashkensis <(DC) Vierh.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Erigeron humilis Graham. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name in
placed in synonymy by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files:
aserul.


Erigeron uniflorus subsp. eriocephalus <(J. Vahl) Cronq.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Erigeron eriocephalus J. Vahl. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name
preferred by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: aserun.


Gnaphalium norvegicum <Gunn.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Omalotheca norvegica (Gunn.)
Schultz-Bip. & F.W, Schultz. (385) This species was doubtfully recorded in
1863 from the Cumberland Sound region of Baffin Island by J.Taylor. Porsild
(1957) reported that its presence within our area has not been verified by
consequent collectors. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under
consideration <Amphi-Atlantic, subarctic-alpine>. (428) Name placed in
synonymy by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: asgnno.


Gnaphalium supinum <L.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Omalotheca supina (L.) DC. (385)
Amphi-Atlantic, subarctic, alpine. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426)
Status under consideration. (428) Name placed into synonymy by Kartesz 1994.
(431) Code used for graphics files: asgnno.


Matricaria ambigua <Ledeb>

      (1) Wild chamomile. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Marticaria
maritmina subsp. phaeocephala(Rupr.) Rauschert. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name placed into synonymy by
Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: asmaam.


Marticaria maritmina subsp. phaeocephala <(Rupr.) Rauschert>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Matricaria ambigua Ledeb. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name
preferred by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: asmama.


Omalotheca norvegica <(Gunn.) Schultz-Bip. & F.W, Schultz>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Gnaphalium norvegicum Gunn. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name
perferred by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: Asomno.


Omalotheca supina <(L.) DC>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Gnaphalium supinum L. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name
preferred by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files: asomsu.


Petasites <Mill.>

      (1) Sweet Coltsfoot. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: aspe.


Petasites frigidus <(L.) Fries>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Petasites frigidus var. frigidus (L.)
Fries Petasites alaskanus Rydb. Petasites corymbosus (R. Br.) Cronq. Petasites
frigidus var. hyperboreoides Hultén Petasites gracilis Britt. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: aspefr.


Petasites sagittatus <(Banks) A. Gray>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Petasites dentatus Blank. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: aspefr.


Saussurea angustifolia <(Willd.) DC.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426)
Status under consideration. (431) Code used for graphics files: assaan.


Senecio <L.>

      (1) Groundsel. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: asseat.


Senecio atropurpureus <(Lebed.) Fedsch.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Senecio atropurpureus subsp. frigidus
(Richards) Hultén Senecio atropurpureus subsp. tomentosus (Kjellm.) Hultén
Senecio atropurpureus var. ulmeri (Steffen) Porsild Senecio frigidus
(Richards.) Less Senecio kjellmanii Porsild. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: asseat.


Senecio congestus <(R.Br.) DC.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Senecio congestus subsp.tonsus (Fern.)
A. & D. Löve Senecio congestus var. palustris (L.) Fern. Senecio congestus
var. tonsus Fern. Senecio palustris (L.) Hook. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: asseco.


Senecio hyperborealis <Greenm.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Packera hyperborealis (Greenm.) A. &
D. Löve. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics
files: asseco.


Senecio lugens <Richards.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Senecio integerrimus Nutt. var. lugens
(Richards.) Boivin. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under
consideration. (431) Code used for graphics files: asselu.


Solidago multiradiata <Ait.>

      (1) Goldenrod. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Solidago multiradiata
var. arctica (DC.) Fern. Solidago cultleri Fern. Solidago virgauera L. var.
arctica DC. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics
files: assomu.


Taraxacum <Weber>

      (1) Dandelion. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: astala.


Taraxacum alaskanum <Rydb.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Taraxacum phymatocarpum J. Vahl /par
Taraxacum pumilum Dahlst. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status
under consideration. (428) Name used by Jack Gillett, not in Prosild, 1957.
(431) Code used for graphics files: astaal.


Taraxacum phymatocarpum <. Vahl>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Taraxacum alaskanum Rydb. Taraxacum
hyparciticum Dahlst. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for
graphics files: astala.


Taraxacum officinale subsp.ceratophorum (Ledeb.) Schinz ex Thellung

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Taraxacum lacerum Greene. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: astala.


Taraxacum lapponicum <Kihlm.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: astala.


Taraxacum phymatocarpum <J. Vahl>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: astala.


Taraxacum pumilum <Dahlst.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (7) Taraxacum phymatocarpum J. Vahl. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (428) Name
placed in synonymy by Kartesz 1994. (431) Code used for graphics files:
astapu.


Betulaceae <S.F. Gray>

      (1) Birch family. (2) Betulaceae, birch family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order
Fagales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Hamamelidae. (408) Cronquist's Order 1 1.
Fagales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Hamamelidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Hamamelidanae. (416) Takhtajan's Order Fagales. (421) 85 species. (422) 2
genera. (423) Genera in study region: Betula,Alnus. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (425) Family. (428) Fewer than 20 records. (431) Code used for
graphics files: be.


Betula glandulosa <Michx.>

      (1) Dwarf birch, ground birch, resin birch, bouleau glanduleux. (2)
Betulaceae, birch family. (4) Fl. Bor.-Amer.2:180.1803. (9) Plants monoecious.
(10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
10-30(-50) cm high <on Arctic Islands>. (12) Plants shrubs. (16) Plants not
colonial. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (32) Stems
erect, or prostrate, or trailing <trailing>. (36) Stems covered with large
resinous wart-like glands <usually;these are transparent or whitish>. (40)
Branches red-brown, or brownish <differenitated into short and long shoots;
lenticels pale>. (41) Branches not glaucous. (42) Branches glabrous, or
glabrescent. (45) Branchlets red-brown <without the taste or odour of winter
green>. (46) Branchlets not glaucous. (47) Branchlets glabrous, or hairy. (58)
Petioles 2-6 mm long. (60) Petioles hairy <with minute hairs>. (62) Petioles
glandular dots at the base of the leaf absent. (64) Juvenile leaves glabrous.
(84) Leaves opposite <2-ranked>. (89) Leaves 5-25(-30) cm long. (90) Leaves
10-25 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades obovate <to orbiculate>. (112) Leaf blades
abaxial surface glabrous, or hairy <especially along the major veins and in
vein axils, often covered with resinous glands>. (119) Leaf blade venation
pinnate <with 2-6 pairs of lateral veins>. (124) Leaf blades secondary veins
arising along midrib. (125) Leaf bases cuneate, or rounded. (126) Leaf blades
flat. (128) Leaf margins crenate, or dentate <teeth obtuse to rounded>. (129)
Leaf margins with teeth or glands toward apex only. (130) Leaf margins with
8-16 teeth or glands per cm. (133) Leaf apices obtuse, or rounded. (135)
Flowering stems with leaves <on short shoots>. (151) Inflorescence a catkin.
(154) Inflorescence clindrical <erect>. (169) Catkins flowering with the
opening of leaf buds. (178) Female catkins densely flowered. (179) Female
catkins 1-2.5 mm long. (180) Female catkins 3-12 mm wide. (181) Female catkins
stout. (182) Female catkins peduncles 1-2 mm long. (183) Female catkins borne
on a flowering branchlet. (197) Staminate flowers inconspicuous <staminate
catkins mostly terminal on branchlets, rarely present on herbarium specimens>.
(198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts green.
(200) Floral bracts with margins the same colour as the body of the bract.
(202) Floral bracts obtuse. (203) Floral bracts widest toward tip. (205)
Floral bracts 1.5-2 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.5-2 mm wide. (207) Floral
bracts glabrous. (210) Floral bracts divided into 3-lobes. (252) Perianth
absent. (255) Sepals 2-4. (256) Sepals free. (265) Petals absent. (278)
Stamens free. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior.
(297) Ovaries ovate. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325)
Fruit a samara <with wings narrower than the body, broadest near the tip and
extended slightly beyond the body>. (360) 2n = 28. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of
limited distribution in the Arctic Islands <but locally abundant>. (371)
Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Victoria, or Southampton. (374) Rocky sites. (376)
Substrate acidic. (378) Substrate with high organic content, or peat. (379)
Tundra. (424) Morphological data coding in progress. (428) Kartesz 1994 has
Betula glandulosa as a synonyon of Betula nana. Southern Baffin possibly 5-10
records. (431) Code used for graphics files: bebegl.


Betula nana <L.>

      (1) Arctic drawf birch, bouleau nain. (2) Betulaceae, birch family. (4)
Sp. Pl. 2:983. 1753. (8) Betula glandulosa Michx. (9) Plants monoecious. (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 10-30 cm
high <on Arctic islands>. (12) Plants shrubs. (16) Plants not colonial. (32)
Stems decumbent, or prostrate. (36) Stems densely hairy <with relatively few
small resinous glands>. (40) Branches gray-brown, or brownish <differentiated
into short and long shoots>. (41) Branches not glaucous. (42) Branches
glabrescent, or hairy <sparsely to densely so, seen at 10X>. (45) Branchlets
gray-brown <without the taste of winter geen>. (46) Branchlets not glaucous.
(47) Branchlets hairy. (58) Petioles 0.5-2 mm long. (60) Petioles glabrous, or
hairy <sparsely>. (64) Juvenile leaves glabrous. (84) Leaves opposite
<2-ranked>. (89) Leaves 0.8-1.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.8-2 mm wide. (93) Leaf
blades obovate <broadly orbiculate>, or reniform. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glabrous, or hairy <sparsely; occasionally witha few small resinous
glands>. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate <with 2-6 pairs of prominent
lateral veins>. (124) Leaf blades secondary veins arising along midrib <and
branching>. (125) Leaf bases rounded, or cordate <nearly>. (128) Leaf margins
crenate <deeply so>. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands toward apex only.
(130) Leaf margins with 8-16 teeth or glands per cm. (133) Leaf apices obtuse,
or rounded. (135) Flowering stems with leaves <on short shoots>. (151)
Inflorescence a catkin. (154) Inflorescence clindrical <erect>. (169) Catkins
flowering with the opening of leaf buds <the catkins are produced the season
before flowering but retained in buds during winter>. (179) Female catkins
6-10 mm long. (180) Female catkins 3.5-4.5 mm wide. (182) Female catkins
peduncles 1-3 mm long. (183) Female catkins borne on a flowering branchlet.
(197) Staminate flowers inconspicuous <staminate catkins mostly terminal on
branchlets, rarely preserved>. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium
<rarely preserved>. (199) Floral bracts green, or brown. (200) Floral bracts
with margins the same colour as the body of the bract. (202) Floral bracts
obtuse. (203) Floral bracts widest toward tip. (205) Floral bracts 5-15(-25)
mm long. (206) Floral bracts 8-20 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (210)
Floral bracts divided into 3-lobes. (255) Sepals 2-4. (256) Sepals free. (265)
Petals absent. (278) Stamens free. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (295) Carpels 2.
(297) Ovaries inverse club-shaped. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2. (317)
Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a samara <broadest near the centre, with definite wings
that are much narrower than the body and not extended beyond it apically>.
(360) 2n = 28. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada <and local>. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin. (377) Substrate rock <barrens>. (379) Tundra. (424) Morphological data
coding in progress. (428) 3-5 records. (431) Code used for graphics files:
bebena.


Boraginaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Lungwort family. (2) Boraginaceae, lungwort family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Solaniflorae. (398) Dahlgren's
Order Boraginales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Asteridae. (412) Cronquist's
Order Lamiales. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Laminae. (420) Takhtajan's Order
Polemoniales. (421) 2000 species. (422) 120 genera. (423) Genera in study
region: Mertensia. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (428)
Probably fewer than 30 records. (431) Code used for graphics files: bo.


Mertensia drummondii <(Lehm.) G.Don>

      (1) Drummond's Lungwort. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (428) Victoria island record. (431) Code used
for graphics files: bomema.


Mertensia maritima <(L.) S.F.Gray>

      (1) Sea-Lungwort. (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (8) Pneumaria maritimaI
(L.) Hill. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Possibly 30 records.
(431) Code used for graphics files: bomema.


Brassicaceae <Burnett>

      (1) Draba family. (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (421)
3200 species. (422) 350 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Arabis, Braya,
Cardamine, Cochlearia, Descurainia,Draba, Eurtrema, Erysimum, Halimolobos,
Lesquerella, Parrya. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431)
Code used for graphics files: ba.


Alyssum americanum <Greene>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (9) Plants bisexual. (11)
Plants 8-11 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems
arising from a caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils.
(18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems about as high as the
leaves. (36) Stems densely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent.
(82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves
alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not
lobed. (89) Leaves 1-1.9 cm long. (90) Leaves 4-5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
oblanceolate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf
blades with hairs equally dense on both surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs
stellate. (119) Leaf blade venation inconspicuous. (125) Leaf bases attenuate.
(126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire.
(133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present. (135) Flowering
stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (146) Inflorescence without
involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 10-20.
(193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne
on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals
present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2-3 mm long. (258)
Sepals green and yellow. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour
translucent or white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent.
(265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow.
(269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals
unlobed. (272) Petals 3.5-4.5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals
longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens
filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281)
Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 0.5 mm long. (293) Carpels
syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary
superior. (299) Ovaries hairy. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely
fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.8 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and
short. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (325) Fruit a
silique. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit 3-5 mm long. (328) Fruit 2.5-3 mm
wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 4-7 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish and purple. (333) Fruit hairy. (334) Fruit
calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style
straight. (337) Persistent style 1.5 mm long. (356) Seeds 3-6. (357) Seeds 1.5
mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364) North American. (365)
Low arctic. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States. (369) Canada:
N.W.T. (Mack.), or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (374) Moist areas <gravel banks>.
(386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: baalam.


Arabidopsis salsuginea <(Pall.) Busch>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Sisymbrium salsuginea
Pall. Thellungiella salsuginea (Pall.) O.E. Schulz Sisymbrium (Arabidopsis)
glaucum Nutt. Turritis diffusa Hook. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 6-30 cm
high. (14) Plants annual herbs, or perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many
stems arising from a caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by
bulbils. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously
taller than the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57)
Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette and
distributed along the stems, or distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves
alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not
lobed. (89) Leaves 0.8-1.3 cm long. (90) Leaves 3.5-4.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf
blades lanceolate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous.
(119) Leaf blade venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases hastate.
(126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire.
(132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous
hydathodes present. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 5-15
cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in
inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose.
(162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 15-50.
(193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne
on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals
present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2.8-3.2 mm long.
(258) Sepals green, or purple. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals herbaceous.
(262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267)
Petals free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without contrasting markings.
(270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 3-3.5 mm long. (273)
Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (275) Corolla unlobed.
(277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal
in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (285) Anthers 0.5 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels
completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries
glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1.
(310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per
style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit
elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 16-18 mm long. (328) Fruit 1 mm wide. (329)
Peduncle length in fruit 5-15 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent.
(332) Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting.
(335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337)
Persistent style 0.2 mm long. (356) Seeds 40-50. (357) Seeds 1 mm long. (358)
Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic, or
alpine. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369)
Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Man., or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Sask., or Yukon. (370)
USA: Alaska, or Colo. (374) Moist areas <lakeshores>. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order
Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used
for graphics files: baarsa.


Arabis alpina <L.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Arabis stricta Pursh.
(9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 7-15 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants single-stemmed. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by
bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously
taller than the leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57)
Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not
lobed. (89) Leaves 3.5-6 cm long. (90) Leaves 11-20 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
ovate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades
with hairs equally dense on both surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs stellate.
(119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (125) Leaf bases cordate. (126) Leaf blades
flat. (127) Leaf margins toothed. (128) Leaf margins serrate. (129) Leaf
margins with teeth or glands all around leaf. (132) Leaf margins with hairs.
(133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present. (135) Flowering
stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 6-9 cm
long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in
inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose.
(162) Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 5-20.
(193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length, or medium-sized,
5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers
bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4.
(256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 3.8-4.2 mm long. (258) Sepals green and
purple. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent or white.
(261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present.
(266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without
contrasting markings. (270) Petals ovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals
7.5-8.5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx.
(277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal
in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (285) Anthers 1 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels
completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries
glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1.
(310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per
style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit
elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 24-48 mm long. (328) Fruit 1-2 mm wide.
(329) Peduncle length in fruit 5-8 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish, or purple. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit
calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style
straight. (337) Persistent style 0.8 mm long. (356) Seeds 10-16. (357) Seeds 1
mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364) Circumpolar. (365) High
arctic, or alpine. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367)
Uncommon. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or Eurasia. (369)
Canada: Lab., or Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or
Ont., or Que. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin. (374) Wet meadows. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order
Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used
for graphics files: baaral.


Arabis arenicola <(Richards.) Gelert>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Arabis arenicola var.
pubescens (S. Wats.) Gelert Arabis arenicola var. arenicola Arabis humifusa
Sisymbrium humifusum Arabis petraea. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 2-15 cm
high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a
caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot
present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves.
(36) Stems glabrous and sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles
absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette and distributed
along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87)
Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 7-10 cm long. (90) Leaves
3.5-4.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades obovate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105)
Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both
surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs branched. (119) Leaf blade venation
appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat.
(127) Leaf margins entire, or toothed. (128) Leaf margins entire, or dentate.
(129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands all around leaf. (132) Leaf margins
with hairs. (133) Leaf apices obtuse. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145)
Flowering stem 5-9 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts.
(149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (192) Flowers
per inflorescence 6-15. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or
length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257)
Sepals 2-2.5 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals glabrous.
(261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present.
(266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white, or pink and purple.
(269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals
unlobed. (272) Petals 4.5-5.5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals
longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens
filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281)
Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 0.2 mm long. (293) Carpels
syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary
superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.2 mm long. (311) Styles
thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal.
(325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 20-25 mm
long. (328) Fruit 1.5 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 50 mm long.
(330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple. (333) Fruit
glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting.
(336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.7 mm long. (356)
Seeds 40-55. (357) Seeds 1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth.
(364) North American. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or
Canada. (369) Canada: Lab., or Man., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or
Ont., or Que., or Sask. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin. (374) Rocky sites. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: baarar.


Arabis divaricarpa <Nels.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Arabis divaricarpa var.
dacotica (Greene) B. Boivin. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 13-28 cm high.
(14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed. (17) Plants not
vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect.
(33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous, or
sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves
deciduous. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette and distributed along the stems.
(84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple.
(88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 15-22 cm long. (90) Leaves 2-3 mm wide.
(93) Leaf blades lanceolate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous, or hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both
surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade
venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases hastate. (126) Leaf blades
flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins
without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145)
Flowering stem 12-22 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts.
(149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (192) Flowers
per inflorescence 5-20. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or
length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257)
Sepals 4-5 mm long. (258) Sepals green. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals
herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4.
(267) Petals free. (268) Petals white, or purple. (269) Petals without
contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals
7-8 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx.
(277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal
in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (285) Anthers 1 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels
completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries
glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1.
(310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per
style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit
elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 40-55 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5 mm wide.
(329) Peduncle length in fruit 10 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish, or purple. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit
calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style
straight. (337) Persistent style 0.5 mm long. (356) Seeds 40-80. (357) Seeds
1.2 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364) North American.
(365) Low arctic. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States. (369)
Canada: Alta., or Man., or N.B., or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or
Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Calif., or Colo., or Mich., or Vt.
(374) Rocky sites. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order
Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics files: baardi.


Arabis drummondii <Gray>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (9) Plants bisexual. (11)
Plants 25-45 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed.
(17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot present.
(32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems
glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous.
(83) Leaves in a basal rosette and distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves
alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not
lobed. (89) Leaves 2-4 cm long. (90) Leaves 3-6 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
lanceolate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (125)
Leaf bases hastate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128)
Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices
acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (136) Flowering stems glabrous.
(145) Flowering stem 18-25 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral
bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (192) Flowers
per inflorescence 5-10. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or
length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257)
Sepals 3.5-4.5 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals glabrous.
(261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present.
(266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without
contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals
6-8 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx.
(277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal
in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (285) Anthers 1 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels
completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries
glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1.
(310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per
style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit
elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 5-6.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-2.5 mm wide.
(329) Peduncle length in fruit 15-17 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish, or purple. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit
calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style
straight. (337) Persistent style 2.5 mm long. (356) Seeds 50-70. (357) Seeds
1.5 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364) North American.
(365) Low arctic, or alpine. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United
States. (369) Canada: Alta., or Lab., or Man., or N.B., or Nfld., or N.W.T.
(Mack.), or N.S., or Ont., or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or
Calif., or Colo. (374) Rocky sites. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387)
Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406)
Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413)
Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae.
(418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics files:
baardr.


Arabis glabra <(L.) Bernh.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Arabis perfoliata Lam.
(9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 75-80 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants single-stemmed. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by
bulbils. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously
taller than the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57)
Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette, or
distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 4-6.5
cm long. (90) Leaves 10-13 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades lanceolate. (97) Leaf
blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases hastate. (126) Leaf blades flat.
(127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins
without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145)
Flowering stem 50 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts.
(149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (192) Flowers
per inflorescence 40-60. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or
length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257)
Sepals 2.5-3.2 mm long. (258) Sepals green. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261)
Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266)
Petals 1. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without
contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals
5-6 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx.
(275) Corolla unlobed. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens
filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281)
Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 0.5 mm long. (293) Carpels
syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary
superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (311) Styles
thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal.
(325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 40-60 mm
long. (328) Fruit 1 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 50-60 mm long.
(330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit green at maturity. (333)
Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.6 mm
long. (356) Seeds 80-100. (357) Seeds 1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359)
Seeds smooth. (364) Amphi-Beringian. (365) Low arctic, or boreal. (368)
Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada:
Alta., or B.C., or Man., or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Sask., or
Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (374) Clay <fields and thickets>. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order
Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used
for graphics files: baargl.


Arabis hirsuta <(L.) Scop.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Arabis hirsuta var.
pycnocarpa (Hopkins) Rollins A. hirsuta subsp. pycnocarpa (Hopkins) Hult. (9)
Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 9-32 cm high. (14) Plants annual herbs. (15)
Plants single-stemmed. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils.
(18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than
the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57)
Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette and
distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 1.5-2.7
cm long. (90) Leaves 4-9 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades lanceolate. (97) Leaf
blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs
equally dense on both surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs stellate. (119) Leaf
blade venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases hastate. (126) Leaf
blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf
margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute, or obtuse. (134) Conspicuous
hydathodes present. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems
glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 9-16 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without
involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 10-15.
(193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne
on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals
present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 1.8-2.2 mm long.
(258) Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour
translucent or white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent.
(265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white.
(269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals
unlobed. (272) Petals 3-4 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals
longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens
filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281)
Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 0.5 mm long. (293) Carpels
syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary
superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.2 mm long. (311) Styles
thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal.
(325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 25-40 mm
long. (328) Fruit 1 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 20 mm long. (330)
Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple. (333) Fruit glabrous.
(334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336)
Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.5 mm long. (356) Seeds
80-100. (357) Seeds 0.6 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364)
North American. (365) Boreal. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United
States. (369) Canada: Alta., or Man., or N.B., or N.W.T. (Mack.), or N.S., or
Ont., or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Calif., or N.Mex.
(374) Rocky sites. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order
Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics files: baarhi.


Arabis holboellii <Hornem.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Arabis holboellii var.
secunda (Howell) Jepson A. holboellii var. retrofracta (Grah.) Rydb. (9)
Plants asexual. (11) Plants 32 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants with many stems arising from a caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively
proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems
conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy.
(52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 1.1 cm
long. (90) Leaves 2 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades lanceolate. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally
dense on both surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs stellate. (119) Leaf blade
venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases hastate. (126) Leaf blades
flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins
with hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous, or hairy.
(145) Flowering stem 15-25 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral
bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous, or hairy.
(192) Flowers per inflorescence 12-15. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in
diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual.
(196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256)
Sepals free. (257) Sepals 4-5 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple. (259)
Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals
herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4.
(267) Petals free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without contrasting
markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 7-8.5 mm
long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277)
Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in
length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous.
(285) Anthers 1 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely
fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307)
Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles
0.5 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316)
Placentation parietal. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit
elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 40-55 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5-2 mm wide.
(330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish, or purple.
(333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.5 mm
long. (356) Seeds 30-40. (357) Seeds 1.5 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359)
Seeds smooth. (364) North American. (365) Low arctic, or boreal. (368)
Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States. (369) Canada:
B.C., or Man., or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370)
USA: Alaska. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Rocky sites. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: baarho.


Braya humilis <(C.A. Mey.) Robins.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Braya humilis subsp.
arctica (Bocher) Rollins B. humilis var. ellesmerensis Harris B. richardsonii
(Rydb.) Fern. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 10-20 cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (17) Plants not vegetatively
proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems
conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules
absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 7-9 mm long. (82) Leaves
deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 7-42 cm
long. (90) Leaves 3-8 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades oblanceolate. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both surfaces. (108)
Leaf blades upper surface villous. (109) Leaf blades adaxial surface hairs
sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface hairy. (113) Leaf blades abaxial surface villous. (114) Leaf blades
abaxial hairs moderately dense. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white.
(118) Leaf blades hairs branched. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (125)
Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire, or
toothed. (128) Leaf margins entire and dentate. (129) Leaf margins with teeth
or glands toward base only. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf
apices obtuse. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems with
leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence absent. (145) Flowering stem 5-9 cm long.
(146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in
inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (152) Inflorescence
multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 2 spikes. (162) Inflorescence main axis
scabrous. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 10-15. (193) Flowers small, less
than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers sessile or subsessile. (195)
Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255)
Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 1.8-2.2 mm long. (258) Sepals green.
(259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent or white. (261)
Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266)
Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white, or purple. (269) Petals
without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed.
(272) Petals 3-5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than
the calyx. (275) Corolla unlobed. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279)
Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the
corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 0.5 mm long. (293)
Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296)
Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries hairy. (300) Ovaries villous. (301) Hairs
moderately dense. (302) White. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely
fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and
short. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules
8-11. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit
14-25 mm long. (328) Fruit 1 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent.
(332) Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit hairy. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting.
(335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337)
Persistent style 0.5 mm long. (356) Seeds 8-11. (357) Seeds 1.2 mm long. (358)
Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364) North American. (365) Low arctic. (366)
Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States. (369) Canada: Alta., or
B.C., or Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T.
(Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Vt. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin, or Ellesmere, or Parry Islands, or Banks, or Victoria. (373)
Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Rocky sites. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales.
(406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales.
(413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics
files: babrhu.


Braya purpurascens <R. Br.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Braya glabella Richards
var. purpurascens (R. Br.) Harris. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 6-15 cm
high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a
caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot
present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves.
(36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (83)
Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous.
(87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 26-32 cm long. (90)
Leaves 1.8-2.2 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades oblanceolate. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf
blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf
margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices obtuse. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes
present. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (138)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence absent. (145)
Flowering stem 1-5 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts.
(149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal and axillary.
(151) Inflorescence racemose. (152) Inflorescence a single spike. (162)
Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 8-11. (193)
Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a
stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals
present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2-2.5 mm long. (258)
Sepals green. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals
non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals white. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate.
(271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 3.8-4.2 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred.
(274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279)
Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the
corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 0.5 mm long. (293)
Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296)
Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries hairy. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and short.
(313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (325) Fruit a silique.
(326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 7-12 mm long. (328) Fruit
1.5-3.5 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 5-8 mm long. (330) Fruit dry.
(331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple and green at maturity, or purple.
(333) Fruit hairy. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.8 mm
long. (356) Seeds 16-20. (357) Seeds 1.2 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359)
Seeds smooth. (364) Circumpolar. (365) High arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada,
or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: Lab., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or
N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Que., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (371)
Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry
Islands, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or Victoria, or King William. (373)
Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Rocky sites. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales.
(406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales.
(413) Takhtajan's Subclass Caryophyllidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics
files: babrpu.


Cardamine bellidifolia <L.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (9) Plants bisexual. (11)
Plants 3-5 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants cushion-like.
(17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot present.
(32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems
glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 6-12 mm
long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate.
(86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed.
(89) Leaves 2.5-8 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.5-2.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
spatulate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (125) Leaf
bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf
margins entire. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices rounded.
(134) Conspicuous hydathodes present. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136)
Flowering stems glabrous. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with
the inflorescence absent. (145) Flowering stem 1.5 cm long. (146)
Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences.
(150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 2-5. (193)
Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a
stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals
present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2.5-3 mm long. (258)
Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262)
Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals
free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270)
Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 4-4.5 mm long. (273) Petals
not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (275) Corolla unlobed. (277)
Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in
length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous.
(285) Anthers 0.5 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely
fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307)
Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles
0.1 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316)
Placentation parietal. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit
elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 13-20 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5 mm wide.
(329) Peduncle length in fruit 20-27 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit black, or brown. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit
calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style
straight. (337) Persistent style 1 mm long. (356) Seeds 5-7. (357) Seeds 1.2
mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364) Circumpolar. (365) High
arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common.
(368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia.
(369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Mack.),
or Que., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Calif., or Colo., or Maine, or N.H.
(371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or
Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or Victoria <Ellef Ringnes Island>. (374) Wet
meadows. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae.
(392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae.
(410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae.
(414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales.
(431) Code used for graphics files: bacabe.


Cardamine digitata <Richards.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Cardamine hyperborea
Schultz C. richardsonii Hult. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 9.5-20 cm high.
(14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants forming loose clusters. (17) Plants
not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (21) Plants
with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (32) Stems
erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous.
(52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 2.5-5.5 mm long.
(82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves
alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves
3.7-4.2 cm long. (90) Leaves 2.2-2.8 mm wide. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous.
(98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets 6, or 7. (100) Leaflets 15-16 mm long.
(101) Leaflet 1-3 mm long. (102) Leaflets oblong. (105) Leaf blades glabrous.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (138) Leaf
or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence absent. (145)
Flowering stem 10-15 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts.
(149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (192) Flowers
per inflorescence 9-15. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or
length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257)
Sepals 2.2-2.8 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals glabrous.
(261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present.
(266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without
contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals
5.5-6.5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx.
(277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal
in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (285) Anthers 1 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels
completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries
glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1.
(310) Styles 1 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per
style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit
elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 20-35 mm long. (328) Fruit 2 mm wide. (330)
Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight.
(364) Amphi-Beringian. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United
States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or
N.W.T. (Mack.), or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (371) Arctic Islands: Banks, or
Victoria <Southampton Island>. (374) Wet meadows. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order
Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used
for graphics files: bacade.


Cardamine minuta <Willd.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Cardamine blaisdellii
Eastw. C. microphylla Adams. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 7-15 cm high.
(14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants forming loose clusters. (17) Plants
not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (21) Plants
with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (23)
Rhizomes elongate. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the
leaves. (36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58)
Petioles 1.5-3.5 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves distributed along
the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves
compound. (89) Leaves 0.2-0.3 cm long. (90) Leaves 1-1.75 mm wide. (97) Leaf
blades herbaceous. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets 7. (100) Leaflets 7-11
mm long. (101) Leaflet 4.5-5 mm long. (102) Leaflets ovate. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous.
(138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence present.
(139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence much
reduced, or scale-like. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with
the inflorescence persistent. (145) Flowering stem 5.5-10 cm long. (146)
Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences.
(150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 12-13. (193)
Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a
stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals
present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 3-3.5 mm long. (258)
Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262)
Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals
free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270)
Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 8.5-9.5 mm long. (273)
Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278)
Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280)
Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 1
mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295)
Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present.
(308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 1 mm long. (311)
Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation
parietal. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (330) Fruit
dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight.
(364) North American. (365) Low arctic. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or
United States. (369) Canada: N.W.T. (Mack.), or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska.
(374) Wet meadows, or rocky sites. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387)
Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406)
Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413)
Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae.
(418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics files:
bacami.


Cardamine pratensis <L.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Cardamine nymanii
Gand., C. pratensis var. angustifolia Hook. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants
10-20 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed. (17)
Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (32)
Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems
glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 15-40 mm
long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84)
Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves compound. (89)
Leaves 3.5-4.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 10-12 mm wide. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets 13-15. (100) Leaflets 6-10 mm
long. (101) Leaflet 1-7 mm long. (102) Leaflets oblanceolate. (105) Leaf
blades glabrous. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems
glabrous. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence absent. (145) Flowering stem 8-12 cm long. (146) Inflorescence
without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150)
Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main
axis glabrous. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 8-14. (193) Flowers
medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk.
(195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present.
(255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 4.2-5 mm long. (258) Sepals
green and purple. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals
non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals white and pink. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals
obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 11-12 mm long. (273) Petals not
spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens
free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free
of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 1 mm long.
(293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2.
(296) Ovary superior. (298) Beak abruptly tapering to style. (299) Ovaries
glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1.
(310) Styles 1 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per
style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 10. (325) Fruit a silique.
(326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 12-15 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5
mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish. (333)
Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 1 mm long.
(356) Seeds 10-11. (357) Seeds 1.5 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds
smooth. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or boreal. (366) Wide-ranging in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada,
or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: Lab., or Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T.
(Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Yukon.
(370) USA: Alaska. (374) Wet meadows. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387)
Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406)
Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413)
Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae.
(418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics files:
bacapr.


Cochlearia officinalis <L.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Cochlearia officinalis
var. groenlandicum (L.) Gelert C. officinalis subsp. arctica (Schlecht.) Hult.
C. officinalis subsp. groenlandicum (L.) Porsild. (9) Plants bisexual. (11)
Plants 2-32 cm high. (12) Plants herbs. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants with many stems arising from a caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively
proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect, or
decumbent. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems
glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 8-11 mm
long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate.
(86) Leaves heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves lobed, or not
lobed. (89) Leaves 0.3-1.2 cm long. (90) Leaves 2.5-11 mm wide. (93) Leaf
blades ovate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119)
Leaf blade venation inconspicuous. (125) Leaf bases truncate. (126) Leaf
blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf
margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices rounded. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes
present. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous.
(138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence absent.
(145) Flowering stem 0.5-1.5 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral
bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal, or
axillary. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis
glabrous. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 15-20. (193) Flowers small, less
than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers
bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4.
(256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 1.8-2 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple.
(259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent.
(265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white.
(269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals
unlobed. (272) Petals 2.7-3.2 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals
longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens
filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281)
Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 0.2 mm long. (293) Carpels
syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary
superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (311) Styles
thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal.
(325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit 3-5 mm long. (328) Fruit
2-3 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 5-7 mm long. (330) Fruit dry.
(331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish and black. (333) Fruit glabrous.
(334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336)
Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.1 mm long. (356) Seeds 16.
(357) Seeds 1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or coastal. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or
United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: B.C., or Lab., or Man., or Nfld., or
N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or
Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Wash. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or
Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or
Victoria. (374) Moist areas. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's
Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418)
Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics files: bacoof.


Descurainia richardsonii <(Sweet) Schulz>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (9) Plants bisexual. (11)
Plants 30 cm high. (14) Plants annual herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed. (17)
Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot present. (32)
Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems
densely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 3-5
mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84)
Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves compound. (89)
Leaves 1.7-2.2 cm long. (90) Leaves 8-11 mm wide. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous.
(98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets 7. (100) Leaflets 5 mm long. (101) Leaflet
1 mm long. (102) Leaflets lanceolate. (105) Leaf blades hairy. (108) Leaf
blades upper surface puberulent. (109) Leaf blades adaxial surface hairs
moderately dense. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white. (113) Leaf blades
abaxial surface villous. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs very dense. (115)
Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white. (118) Leaf blades hairs glandular and
hairs stellate. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems
hairy. (145) Flowering stem 10-15 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without
involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis hairy.
(192) Flowers per inflorescence 25-35. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in
diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual.
(196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256)
Sepals free. (257) Sepals 0.8-1.2 mm long. (258) Sepals green and yellow.
(259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent or white. (261)
Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266)
Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow. (269) Petals without
contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals
1-1.7 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals same length as the
calyx, or longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279)
Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the
corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 0.2 mm long. (293)
Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296)
Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (311) Styles
thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal.
(325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 7-9 mm
long. (328) Fruit 1.2 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332)
Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335)
Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent
style 0.2 mm long. (356) Seeds 10-14. (357) Seeds 1 mm long. (358) Seeds
brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364) North American. (365) Boreal. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Canada, or United States. (369) Canada: Alta., or Lab., or Man.,
or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or
Colo., or Idaho., or Maine, or Minn., or Mont., or N.Mex. (374) Rocky sites.
(386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: baderi.


Descurainia sophioides <(Fisch.) Schulz>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (8) Sisymbrium sophioides
Fisch. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 25-50 cm high. (14) Plants annual
herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating
by bulbils. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously
taller than the leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57)
Petioles present. (58) Petioles 1.5-2.5 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83)
Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves 2.8-3.5 cm long. (90) Leaves
10-14 mm wide. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets
11. (100) Leaflets 8-10 mm long. (101) Leaflet 1.7-2.3 mm long. (102) Leaflets
lanceolate. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrescent. (113) Leaf blades abaxial
surface villous. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse. (115) Leaf blades
abaxial surface hairs white. (118) Leaf blades hairs glandular. (134)
Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136)
Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 12-25 cm long. (146) Inflorescence
without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150)
Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main
axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 20-70. (193) Flowers small, less
than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers
bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4.
(256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 1.7-2 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple.
(259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent.
(265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow.
(269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals
unlobed. (272) Petals 3-3.5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals
longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens
filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281)
Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 0.1 mm long. (293) Carpels
syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary
superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (311) Styles
thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal.
(325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 20-27 mm
long. (328) Fruit 1 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332)
Fruit yellowish and purple. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight.
(337) Persistent style 0.2 mm long. (356) Seeds 15-20. (357) Seeds 1.2 mm
long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364) Amphi-Beringian. (365) Low
arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon.
(368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada:
Man., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Yukon.
(370) USA: Alaska. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Banks, or Victoria. (374)
Rocky sites. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order
Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics files: badeso.


Draba <Nutt.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (425) Genus. (431) Code used for graphics files: badr.


Draba adamsii <Ledeb.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Fl. Ross. I:147. 1842.
(5) D. lasiocarpa Adams D. alpina L. var. adamsii (Ledeb.) O.E. Schulz. (9)
Plants bisexual. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 1.5-8 cm high.
(14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a
caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot
present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the leaves. (36) Stems
sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 0.7-1.2
cm long. (90) Leaves 2-3 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades circular. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull. (105) Leaf blades hairy.
(107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrescent. (109) Leaf blades adaxial surface
hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white. (111) Leaf blades abaxial
surface not glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairy. (114) Leaf
blades abaxial hairs moderately dense. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs
white. (116) Leaf blades abaxial surface erect. (118) Leaf blades hairs
stellate. (119) Leaf blade venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases
attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf
margins entire. (132) Leaf margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134)
Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136)
Flowering stems hairy. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149)
Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence
racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence
2-6. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers
borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252)
Perianth present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free.
(257) Sepals 2-2.7 mm long. (258) Sepals purple. (259) Sepals hairy. (260)
Sepals hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals
non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals yellow. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals
obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals 2.5-3 mm long. (273) Petals not
spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens
free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free
of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285)
Anthers 0.4-0.6 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely
fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307)
Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles
0.1 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317)
Ovules 8-10. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit ovoid and distinctly flat.
(327) Fruit 6-7 mm long. (328) Fruit 2.5-4 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in
fruit 3-5 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple.
(333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.2 mm
long. (356) Seeds 8-10. (357) Seeds 1-1.2 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359)
Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = 32. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic
chromosome number of family x=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) High arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Rare. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or
United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: N.W.T. (Frank.). (370) USA: Alaska.
(371) Arctic Islands: Ellesmere. (373) Substrate type: acidic, or calcareous,
or peat. (374) Wet meadows, or rocky sites. (375) Substrate imperfectly
drained, or on seepage slopes. (379) Wet meadows, or slopes, or ridges. (380)
Flowers June-July. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order
Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics files: brdrad.


Draba alpina <L.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Sp. Pl. 2:642. 1753.
(5) D. alpina var. nana Hook. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants less than 15 cm
high. (11) Plants 5-20 cm high. (12) Plants herbs. (14) Plants perennial
herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a caudex. (17) Plants not
vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect.
(33) Stems shorter than the leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules
absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal.
(84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple.
(88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 0.7-1.8 cm long. (90) Leaves 2-4 mm wide.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades
adaxial surface dull. (108) Leaf blades upper surface pilose. (109) Leaf
blades adaxial surface hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white.
(113) Leaf blades abaxial surface villous. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs
moderately dense. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white. (118) Leaf
blades hairs stellate, hairs simple, unbranched, and hairs branched. (119)
Leaf blade venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126)
Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132)
Leaf margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes
absent. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy.
(146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in
inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose.
(162) Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 4-9.
(193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne
on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252)
Perianth present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free.
(257) Sepals 3-4 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals hairy.
(260) Sepals hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262)
Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals
free. (268) Petals yellow. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270)
Petals obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals 4-5 mm long. (273) Petals
not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278)
Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280)
Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers
yellow. (285) Anthers 0.5 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels
completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries
glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1.
(310) Styles 0.2-0.3 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation
parietal. (317) Ovules 8-12. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit ovoid and
distinctly flat. (327) Fruit 7-10 mm long. (328) Fruit 2.5-4.5 mm wide. (329)
Peduncle length in fruit 2.5-4 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple and green at maturity. (333) Fruit glabrous, or
hairy. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336)
Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.4-0.6 mm long. (356) Seeds
8-12. (357) Seeds 1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds verrucose. (360)
2n = 64, or 120. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number
of family x=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364) Circumpolar. (365)
Arctic and alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common.
(368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada:
B.C., or Lab., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or
Que., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or
Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or
Victoria, or King William, or Southampton, or Coats <Queen Elizabeth Islands>.
(373) Substrate type: acidic, or calcareous. (374) Wet meadows, or rocky
sites. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes. (377)
Substrate gravel, or silt. (378) Substrate with low organic content, or with
high organic content. (379) Hummocks, or slopes. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales.
(406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales.
(413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: badral.


Draba arctogena <Eckman>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (6) Type: type from
Greenland, Scoggan. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high.
(11) Plants 3-6 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many
stems arising from a caudex. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33)
Stems shorter than the leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules
absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal.
(84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple.
(88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 0.4-0.7 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.8-2.2 mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades circular. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf
blades hairy. (107) Leaf blades adaxially hairy. (109) Leaf blades adaxial
surface hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white. (112) Leaf blades
abaxial surface hairy. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs moderately dense. (115)
Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple,
unbranched and hairs branched. (119) Leaf blade venation appearing
single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf
margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins with hairs.
(133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present. (135) Flowering
stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (146) Inflorescence without
involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis hairy.
(192) Flowers per inflorescence 3-5. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in
diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual.
(196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252) Perianth present. (254) Sepals present.
(255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2.5-3 mm long. (258) Sepals
green and purple. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent or
white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals
present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow. (269) Petals
without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed.
(272) Petals 3.5-4.5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer
than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments
markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens fused to the corolla. (281) Stamens
filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers 0.3-0.4 mm long. (293)
Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296)
Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries hairy. (304) Straight. (307) Styles present.
(308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.1-0.2 mm long.
(313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 8-12.
(325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit ovoid and distinctly flat. (364) North
American. (365) High arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Rare. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada. (369)
Canada: N.W.T. (Frank.). (371) Arctic Islands: Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg.
(374) Rocky sites. (375) Substrate on seepage slopes. (379) Slopes. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: badrar.


Draba cinerea <Adams>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Mem. Soc. Imp.
Naturalistes Moscou 5: 103. 1817. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants less than
15 cm high. (11) Plants 12-25 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants with many stems arising from a caudex. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems
erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems sparsely
hairy. (52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules not sheathing. (82) Leaves
deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 1.5-2
cm long. (90) Leaves 3-5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades spatulate. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull. (107) Leaf blades
adaxially hairy. (109) Leaf blades adaxial surface hairs sparse. (110) Leaf
blades upper surface white. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairy. (114)
Leaf blades abaxial hairs moderately dense. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface
hairs white. (116) Leaf blades abaxial surface erect. (118) Leaf blades hairs
stellate. (119) Leaf blade venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases
attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (128) Leaf margins dentate, or entire.
(129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands all around leaf. (132) Leaf margins
with hairs. (133) Leaf apices obtuse. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (146)
Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences.
(150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162)
Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 6-12. (193)
Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a
stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252) Perianth
present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals
2.5-3 mm long. (258) Sepals green, or brown. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals
hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals
non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals white. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate.
(271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals 2.8-3.2 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred.
(274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279)
Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the
corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers
0.1-0.2 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused.
(295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries hairy. (304) Branched and
stellate. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1.
(310) Styles 0.2-0.3 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 2. (316) Placentation
parietal. (317) Ovules 10-14. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit ovoid and
distinctly flat. (327) Fruit 8-10 mm long. (328) Fruit 2.5-3 mm wide. (329)
Peduncle length in fruit 4-7 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent.
(332) Fruit purple, or green at maturity. (333) Fruit hairy. (334) Fruit calyx
not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style
straight. (337) Persistent style 0.7-1 mm long. (356) Seeds 10-14. (357) Seeds
1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = 48, or 56, or
64. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family
X=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or
alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada:
B.C., or Lab., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or
Ont., or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Banks, or
Victoria, or Prince of Wales, or King William, or Southampton <Eglinton
Island>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Rocky sites, or clay, or
sand. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes. (376)
Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate sand, or clay, or till. (378) Substrate
with low organic content. (379) River terraces, or slopes. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order
Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used
for graphics files: badrci.


Draba corymbosa <R.Br.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (428) PETER WHAT IS HAPPENING HERE. (431) Code used for graphics
files: badrco.


Draba crassifolia <Graham>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Edinburgh New Philos.
J. 7:182. 1829. (5) D. parryi Rydb. D. crassifolia var. parryi (Rydb.) O.E.
Schulz. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 1-3
cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from
a caudex. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the
leaves. (36) Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57)
Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette. (84)
Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88)
Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 0.4-1 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.5-3 mm wide. (93)
Leaf blades circular. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades adaxial
surface dull. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation appearing
single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf
margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins with hairs.
(133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering
stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (146) Inflorescence
without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150)
Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence 3-12. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length.
(194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (252) Perianth present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4.
(256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 1.8-2.2 mm long. (258) Sepals green and
purple. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals
non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals white. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate.
(271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals 2.2-2.5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred.
(274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279)
Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the
corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers
0.2 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295)
Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present.
(308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (313)
Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 8-12. (325)
Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit ovoid and distinctly flat. (327) Fruit 6-8 mm
long. (328) Fruit 2-2.5 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 1.7-2.5 mm
long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple, or green at
maturity. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit
styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.2
mm long. (356) Seeds 8-12. (357) Seeds 1-1.2 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359)
Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = 40. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic
chromosome number of family X=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364)
Amphi-Atlantic. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada,
or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or N.W.T.
(Frank.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Que., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Ariz.,
or Calif., or Colo. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin. (373) Substrate type:
acidic. (374) Snow beds. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained. (377) Substrate
silt. (378) Substrate with high organic content. (379) Snow beds. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: badrcr.


Draba fladnizcensis <Wulf.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Jacquin, Miscell.
Austr. Bot. I: 147. 1778. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants less than 15 cm
high. (11) Plants 4-10 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with
many stems arising from a caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating
by bulbils. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than
the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57)
Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not
lobed. (89) Leaves 0.5-0.9 cm long. (90) Leaves 2-2.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf
blades circular. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades adaxial
surface dull. (105) Leaf blades glabrous, or hairy. (106) Leaf blades with
hairs on the abaxial. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched and hairs
branched. (119) Leaf blade venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases
attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf
margins entire. (132) Leaf margins with hairs, or without hairs. (133) Leaf
apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems
without leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (146) Inflorescence without
involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis
glabrous. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 3-6. (193) Flowers small, less than
5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers
bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252) Perianth present. (254) Sepals
present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2-2.5 mm long. (258)
Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals glabrous, or hairy. (261) Sepals
herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4.
(267) Petals free. (268) Petals green. (269) Petals without contrasting
markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals 3.5-4 mm
long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277)
Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in
length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous.
(282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers 0.5 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous.
(294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299)
Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309)
Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316)
Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 8-10. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit
ovoid and distinctly flat. (327) Fruit 7-9 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-3 mm wide.
(329) Peduncle length in fruit 4-6 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight.
(337) Persistent style 0.2 mm long. (356) Seeds 8-10. (357) Seeds 0.7-0.9 mm
long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = 16, or 32. (361)
Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family x=5-10. (363)
Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364) North American. (365) Arctic. (366)
Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere:
Greenland, or Canada, or United States. (369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Lab.,
or Man., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Que., or
Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Colo., or Utah. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or
Devon, or Ellesmere, or Parry Islands. (373) Substrate type: acidic. (374)
Rocky sites. (375) Substrate dry. (376) Substrate acidic. (377) Substrate
gravel. (378) Substrate with low organic content. (379) Hummocks. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: badrfl.


Draba glabella <Pursh>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Fl. Amer. Sept. 2: 434.
1814. (5) Draba daurica DC Draba henneana Schlecht. Draba canadensis Brunet
Draba arabisans Michx. var. canadensis (Brunet) Fern. & Knowlton Draba
arabisans var. orthocarpa Fern. & Knowlton Draba glabella var. orthocarpa
(Fern & Knowlton) Fern. Draba megasperma Fern. & Knowlton Draba glabella var.
megasperma (Fern. & Knowlton) Fern. (9) Plants dioecious. (10) Plants more
than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 12-20 cm high. (12) Plants herbs. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a caudex. (18)
Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the
leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent.
(82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86)
Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89)
Leaves 1.2-4.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 2.5-6 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull. (105)
Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both
surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs stellate. (119) Leaf blade venation
appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat.
(127) Leaf margins entire, or toothed. (128) Leaf margins entire and dentate.
(129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands toward apex only. (132) Leaf margins
with hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (146)
Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences.
(150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162)
Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 5-10. (193)
Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a
stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252) Perianth
present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals
4-5 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals
hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals
non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals white. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate.
(271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals 3.5-4 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred.
(274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279)
Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the
corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers
0.4 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295)
Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present.
(308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.3-0.5 mm long.
(313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 8-12.
(325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit ellipsoid and distinctly flat. (327) Fruit
8-11 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-3 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 12-15 mm
long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple, or purple
and green at maturity. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting.
(335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337)
Persistent style 0.4-0.7 mm long. (356) Seeds 8-12. (357) Seeds 1 mm long.
(358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = 64, or 80. (361) Rollins,
1993. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family x=5-10. (363) Ploidy
levels recorded 4N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic and alpine. (366)
Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere:
Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: B.C., or
Lab., or Man., or N.B., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or
N.W.T. (Mack.), or N.S., or Ont., or Que., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or
N.York. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or
Victoria, or Southampton <Queen Elizabeth Islands>. (373) Substrate type:
calcareous. (374) Moist areas <sandy and gravelly beaches, sandy river
margins>, or rocky sites, or sand. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or on
seepage slopes, or dry. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate rock, or
gravel, or sand, or till. (378) Substrate with low organic content, or with
high organic content. (379) Along streams, or river terraces, or lake shores,
or slopes, or ridges, or cliffs. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387)
Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406)
Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413)
Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae.
(418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: badrgl.


Draba lactea <Adams>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Mem. Soc. Imp.
Naturalistes Moscou 5: 104. 1817. (5) Draba allenii Fern. Draba wahlenbergii
Hartm. Draba heterotricha Lindblad Draba fladnizensis Wulfen var. heterotricha
(Lindenblad) Ball. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11)
Plants 6-15 cm high. (12) Plants herbs. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants with many stems arising from a caudex. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems
erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous,
or sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves
deciduous. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves
not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves
0.8-1 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.5-2.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (97) Leaf
blades herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull. (107) Leaf blades
adaxially glabrescent. (109) Leaf blades adaxial surface hairs sparse. (110)
Leaf blades upper surface white. (111) Leaf blades abaxial surface not
glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrescent. (114) Leaf blades
abaxial hairs sparse. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white. (118)
Leaf blades hairs stellate and hairs branched. (119) Leaf blade venation
appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat.
(127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins with
hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135)
Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (146)
Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences.
(150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162)
Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 3-6. (193)
Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a
stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252) Perianth
present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 1. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals
2-2.5 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261)
Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266)
Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals green. (269) Petals without
contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed, or 2-lobed.
(272) Petals 3-4 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than
the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments
markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens
filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers 0.2-0.3 mm long. (293)
Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296)
Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.2-0.3 mm long. (313) Stigmas
per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 8-12. (325) Fruit a
silique. (326) Fruit ovoid and distinctly flat. (327) Fruit 6-10 mm long.
(328) Fruit 2.5-3 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 3-5 mm long. (330)
Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple and green at maturity.
(333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.4-0.5 mm
long. (356) Seeds 8-12. (357) Seeds 1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds
verrucose. (360) 2n = 16, or 48. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic
chromosome number of family x=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or
United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.),
or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Que., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or
Cornwallis, or Banks, or Victoria, or Prince of Wales, or King William, or
Southampton <Prince Charles Island, Elleff Ringnes Island, Jenny Lind Island>.
(373) Substrate type: acidic, or calcareous. (374) Wet meadows, or moist areas
<seepage swales>, or hummocks, or rocky sites, or sand. (375) Substrate
imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes, or dry. (376) Substrate acidic, or
calcareous. (377) Substrate rock, or gravel, or sand, or silt, or clay, or
till, or moss. (378) Substrate with low organic content, or with high organic
content, or peat. (379) Wet meadows, or hummocks, or around the margins of
ponds, or along streams, or river terraces, or lake shores, or slopes, or
ridges, or cliffs. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order
Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics files: badrla.


Draba longipes <Raup>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Contr. Arnold Arbor. 6:
165. 1934. (5) Draba kananaskis G. Mulligan. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants
less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 5-12 cm high. (12) Plants herbs. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a caudex. (18)
Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the
leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent.
(82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86)
Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89)
Leaves 1-4 cm long. (90) Leaves 4-10 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (97)
Leaf blades herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull. (105) Leaf
blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both surfaces.
(118) Leaf blades hairs stellate. (119) Leaf blade venation appearing
single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf
margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins with hairs.
(133) Leaf apices acute. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering
stems hairy. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in
inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose.
(162) Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 6-10.
(193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne
on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252)
Perianth present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free.
(257) Sepals 2.5-3 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals hairy.
(260) Sepals hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262)
Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 1. (267) Petals
free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270)
Petals obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals 4.5-5 mm long. (273) Petals
not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278)
Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280)
Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers
yellow. (285) Anthers 0.4-0.5 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels
completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries
glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1.
(310) Styles 0.4-0.6 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation
parietal. (317) Ovules 8-12. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit ellipsoid and
distinctly flat. (327) Fruit 6-11 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-3 mm wide. (329)
Peduncle length in fruit 4-7 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent.
(332) Fruit purple and green at maturity, or purple. (333) Fruit glabrous.
(334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336)
Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.5-0.7 mm long. (356) Seeds
8-12. (357) Seeds 1.2 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds verrucose. (360)
2n = 64. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family
x=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364) North American. (365) Low
arctic, or alpine. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367)
Rare. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States. (369) Canada:
Alta., or B.C. (370) USA: Alaska, or Wyo. (371) Arctic Islands: Victoria.
(373) Substrate type: acidic, or calcareous. (374) Wet meadows, or moist
areas, or snow beds, or rocky sites. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or
on seepage slopes, or dry. (376) Substrate acidic, or calcareous. (377)
Substrate rock, or gravel, or sand, or silt. (378) Substrate with low organic
content, or with high organic content. (379) Wet meadows, or snow beds. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: badrlo.


Draba nivalis <Lilj.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Utkast Sv. Fl. 236.
1792. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
2.5-15 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems
arising from a caudex. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems
shorter than the leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57)
Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not
lobed. (89) Leaves 0.35-0.6 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.2-1.7 mm wide. (93) Leaf
blades oblanceolate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades hairy.
(106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both surfaces. (118) Leaf blades
hairs stellate. (119) Leaf blade venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf
bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf
margins entire. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute.
(134) Conspicuous hydathodes present. (135) Flowering stems with leaves, or
without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (146) Inflorescence without
involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis hairy.
(192) Flowers per inflorescence 4-9. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in
diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual.
(196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252) Perianth present. (254) Sepals present.
(255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 1.8-2.2 mm long. (258) Sepals
green. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent or white.
(261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present.
(266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without
contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals
2.8-3.5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx.
(277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal
in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers 0.2 mm long. (293) Carpels
syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary
superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.2 mm long. (313) Stigmas per
style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 6-10. (325) Fruit a
silique. (326) Fruit distinctly flat and oblong. (327) Fruit 6-10 mm long.
(328) Fruit 1.2-2 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 7-9 mm long. (330)
Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple, or green at maturity.
(333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.4-0.6 mm
long. (356) Seeds 6-10. (357) Seeds 1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds
verrucose. (360) 2n = 16. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic chromosome
number of family x=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364) Circumpolar.
(365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367)
Common. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or
Eurasia. (369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T.
(Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Yukon.
(370) USA: Alaska, or Colo., or Idaho., or Oreg., or Wyo. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or
Victoria, or Somerset, or King William, or Southampton. (373) Substrate type:
acidic, or calcareous. (374) Rocky sites. (375) Substrate on seepage slopes,
or dry. (376) Substrate acidic, or calcareous. (377) Substrate rock, or
gravel. (378) Substrate with low organic content. (379) River terraces, or
slopes, or ridges, or cliffs. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's
Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418)
Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics files: badrni.


Draba norvegica <Gunn.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Fl. Norveg. 2:106.
1772. (5) Draba rupestris R.Br. Draba trichella Fries Draba scandinavica Draba
hebecarpa Lindblom Draba norvegica var. hebecarpa (Lindblom) O. E. Schulz
Draba norvegica var. pleiophylla Fern. Draba hirta var. norvegica (Gunn.)
Lilj. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 4-8
cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from
a caudex. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the
leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent.
(82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86)
Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89)
Leaves 0.6-1.4 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.8-2.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
circular. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull.
(105) Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs on the abaxial. (118)
Leaf blades hairs branched. (119) Leaf blade venation appearing single-veined.
(125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire.
(128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices
acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems without
leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (146) Inflorescence without involucral
bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence 4-7. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length.
(194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (252) Perianth present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4.
(256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2.5-3 mm long. (258) Sepals purple. (259)
Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals
herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4.
(267) Petals free. (268) Petals green. (269) Petals without contrasting
markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals 3.5-4 mm
long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277)
Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in
length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous.
(282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers 0.5-0.6 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous.
(294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299)
Ovaries hairy. (304) Straight. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely
fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.5 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 1.
(316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 8-14. (325) Fruit a silique. (326)
Fruit ovoid and distinctly flat. (327) Fruit 4-6 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-2.5 mm
wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 3-4 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple. (333) Fruit hairy. (334) Fruit calyx not
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight.
(337) Persistent style 0.5-0.6 mm long. (356) Seeds 8-14. (357) Seeds 1 mm
long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = 48. (361) Rollins,
1993. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family X=5-10. (363) Ploidy
levels recorded 4N. (364) Amphi-Atlantic. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (368) Northern hemisphere:
Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: Nfld., or
N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or N.S., or Que. (370)
USA: Minn. (371) Arctic Islands: Parry Islands. (373) Substrate type:
calcareous. (374) Moist areas <imperfectly-drained raised river terrace>.
(375) Substrate imperfectly drained. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377)
Substrate rock, or gravel. (378) Substrate with low organic content. (379)
River terraces. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order
Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics files: badrno.


Draba oblongata <R. Br.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Syst. Nat. 2: 342.
1821. (5) Draba groenlandica Ekman Draba groenlandica var. arctogena Ekman.
(9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 2-6 cm
high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect.
(33) Stems shorter than the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy.
(52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous, or
marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 0.8-1.5
cm long. (90) Leaves 2.5-4.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades oblanceolate. (97) Leaf
blades herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull, or shiny. (105)
Leaf blades hairy. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades
abaxial surface glabrescent. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse. (115)
Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white. (118) Leaf blades hairs stellate,
hairs simple, unbranched, and hairs branched. (119) Leaf blade venation
appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat.
(127) Leaf margins entire, or toothed. (128) Leaf margins dentate, or entire.
(129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands all around leaf. (133) Leaf apices
acute, or obtuse. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems
with leaves, or without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (146)
Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences.
(150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162)
Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 3-7. (193)
Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a
stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252) Perianth
present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals
3-3.5 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals
hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals
non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals white, or yellow. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270)
Petals obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals 3.5-4.5 mm long. (273)
Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278)
Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280)
Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers
yellow. (285) Anthers 0.4-0.5 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels
completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries hairy.
(304) Straight and stellate. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely
fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.2 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 1.
(316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 10-16. (325) Fruit a silique. (326)
Fruit ovoid and distinctly flat. (327) Fruit 7-9 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-2.5 mm
wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 2-3 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple. (333) Fruit glabrous, or hairy. (334) Fruit
calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style
straight. (337) Persistent style 0.4-0.6 mm long. (356) Seeds 10-16. (357)
Seeds 1.4-1.6 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n =
64. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family
x=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364) North American. (365) High
arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada. (369) Canada: N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T.
(Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.). (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or
Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Banks, or Victoria, or Prince
of Wales, or Somerset, or King William, or Southampton. (373) Substrate type:
calcareous. (374) Wet meadows, or rocky sites, or clay. (375) Substrate
imperfectly drained, or dry. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate
gravel, or sand, or clay, or moss. (378) Substrate with low organic content,
or with high organic content. (379) Wet meadows, or river terraces, or ridges.
(386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: badrob.


Draba pilosa <DC>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (9) Plants bisexual. (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 4-10 cm high. (14) Plants perennial
herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a caudex. (18) Taproot
present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the leaves. (36) Stems
sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 0.6-0.8
cm long. (90) Leaves 2-2.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades circular. (97) Leaf
blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat.
(127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins with
hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136)
Flowering stems glabrous, or hairy. (146) Inflorescence without involucral
bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous, or hairy.
(192) Flowers per inflorescence 2-5. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in
diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual.
(196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252) Perianth present. (254) Sepals present.
(255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 3.5-4 mm long. (258) Sepals
green and purple. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent or
white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals
present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow. (269) Petals
without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed.
(272) Petals 3.5-4.5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer
than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments
markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens
filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers 0.6-0.8 mm long. (293)
Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296)
Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.4 mm long. (313) Stigmas per
style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 8-10. (325) Fruit a
silique. (326) Fruit ovoid and distinctly flat. (327) Fruit 4-5 mm long. (328)
Fruit 1.8-2.2 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 6-8 mm long. (330) Fruit
dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334)
Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent
style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.5-0.6 mm long. (356) Seeds 8-10.
(357) Seeds 1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds verrucose. (364) North
American. (365) Low arctic. (366) Neither wide-ranging nor of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada. (369)
Canada: N.W.T. (Mack.). (374) Wet meadows, or rocky sites. (375) Substrate
imperfectly drained, or dry. (377) Substrate gravel. (379) Wet meadows, or
river terraces. (384) This species may not stay - cannot find references and
not on islands. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass
Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order
Capparales. (431) Code used for graphics files: badrpi.


Draba subcapitata <Simmons>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Vasc. Pl. Fl.
Ellesmereland 87. 1906. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high.
(11) Plants 1-9 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (18)
Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the leaves. (36)
Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves
not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves
0.5-1.2 cm long. (90) Leaves 3-5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades oblanceolate. (97)
Leaf blades herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull. (105) Leaf
blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs on the abaxial, or with hairs
equally dense on both surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched and
hairs branched. (119) Leaf blade venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf
bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf
margins entire. (132) Leaf margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134)
Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136)
Flowering stems hairy. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149)
Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence
racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence
2-8. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length, or
medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk.
(195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252) Perianth present.
(254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2.5-3.5
mm long. (258) Sepals green. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour
translucent or white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent.
(265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white.
(269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals
2-lobed. (272) Petals 4.5-5.5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals
longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens
filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281)
Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers 0.4-0.6 mm
long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels
2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (304) Straight and branched.
(307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310)
Styles 0.4-0.6 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation
parietal. (317) Ovules 8-14. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit oblong. (327)
Fruit 4-7 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-3 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 2-4
mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple. (333)
Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.2-0.4 mm
long. (356) Seeds 8-14. (357) Seeds 1.2-1.5 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359)
Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = 16. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic
chromosome number of family x=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364)
Amphi-Beringian. (365) High arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands.
(367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or Eurasia.
(369) Canada: N.W.T. (Frank.). (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Ellesmere, or
Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or Victoria, or
Somerset, or King William, or Southampton <Mackenzie King Is., Ellef Ringnes
Is., Hans Is., Ward Hunt Is.>. (373) Substrate type: acidic, or calcareous.
(374) Moist areas <moist peat, slope, depression>, or snow beds, or rocky
sites. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes, or dry.
(376) Substrate acidic, or calcareous. (377) Substrate gravel, or moss. (378)
Substrate with low organic content, or with high organic content, or peat.
(379) Snow beds, or depressions of low centre polygons, or slopes. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: badrsu.


Erysimum pallasii <(Pursh) Fern.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Rhodora 27: 171. 1925.
(5) Cheiranthus pallasii Pursh Cheiranthus pygmaeus Adams Erysimum pygmaeus
(Adams) Gay Hesperis pygmaeus (Adams) Hook. Hesperis hookeri Ledeb. (9) Plants
asexual. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 7-25 cm high. (12)
Plants herbs. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed, or with
many stems arising from a caudex. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (36)
Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 2-3 cm
long. (90) Leaves 2-3 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades spatulate. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull. (105) Leaf blades hairy.
(106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both surfaces. (125) Leaf bases
attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (128) Leaf margins dentate, or entire.
(129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands toward apex only. (132) Leaf margins
without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent.
(135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (146)
Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences.
(150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162)
Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 8-25. (193)
Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a
stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252) Perianth
present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals
7.5-8.5 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals hairy. (260)
Sepals hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals
non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals purple. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals
obovate. (271) Petals unlobed, or 2-lobed. (272) Petals 12-15 mm long. (273)
Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278)
Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280)
Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers
yellow. (285) Anthers 1.8-2.2 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels
completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries hairy.
(304) Straight. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309)
Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.4-0.6 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316)
Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 25-35. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit
elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 60-100 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-3 mm wide.
(329) Peduncle length in fruit 10-16 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple. (333) Fruit hairy. (334) Fruit calyx not
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight.
(337) Persistent style 1.2-1.7 mm long. (356) Seeds 25-35. (357) Seeds 2.2-2.5
mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = <24, ca. 28, 36,
+42; n=14 Mulligan & Porsild - voucher = CAN 303497 - Porsild 55 - Ogilvie
Mts., Yukon>. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of
family x=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364) Amphi-Beringian. (365)
Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: N.W.T.
(Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska.
(371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands,
or Banks, or Victoria. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Rocky sites, or
clay, or sand. (375) Substrate on seepage slopes. (376) Substrate calcareous.
(377) Substrate gravel, or sand, or clay, or till. (378) Substrate with low
organic content. (379) River terraces, or slopes, or ridges. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order
Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: brerpa.


Eutrema edwardsii <R.Br.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Chlor. Melvill. 193.
1823. (5) Eutrema labradoricum Turcz. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants less
than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 8-30 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a caudex.
(18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than
the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present,
or absent. (58) Petioles 30-40 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 0.9-3.5
cm long. (90) Leaves 4-25 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades elliptic, or ovate. (97)
Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
pinnate, or appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases obtuse, or attenuate.
(126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire.
(132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous
hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems
glabrous. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in
inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose.
(162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 6-14.
(193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne
on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252)
Perianth present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free.
(257) Sepals 2-2.3 mm long. (258) Sepals purple. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261)
Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266)
Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without
contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals
2.8-3.2 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx.
(277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal
in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers 0.4-0.5 mm long. (293) Carpels
syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary
superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.3-0.4 mm long. (313) Stigmas
per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 4-6. (325) Fruit a
silique. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 12-17 mm long. (328)
Fruit 1.5-2 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 3-4 mm long. (330) Fruit
dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334)
Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent
style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.5-0.6 mm long. (356) Seeds 4-6. (357)
Seeds 1.6-1.8 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n =
<18,28,42>. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of
family x=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364) North American. (365)
Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States. (369) Canada: N.W.T.
(Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Que., or Yukon. (370) USA:
Alaska. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg,
or Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or Victoria, or Somerset, or King
William, or Southampton <Stefansson Is.>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous.
(374) Wet meadows, or hummocks, or rocky sites, or clay, or sand. (375)
Substrate imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes, or on solifluction
slopes, or dry. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate gravel, or sand,
or silt, or clay. (378) Substrate with low organic content, or with high
organic content. (379) Wet meadows, or around the margins of ponds, or along
streams, or river terraces, or lake shores <beaches>, or ridges. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: baeued.


Halimolobos mollis <(Hook.) Rollins>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Rhodora 43: 480. 1941.
(5) Turritis mollis Hook. Arabidopsis mollis (Hook.) O.E. Schulz Arabis
hookeri Lange Arabis hookeri Draba breviramosa Abrom. Arabis hookeri var.
multicaulis Simmons. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high.
(11) Plants 15-50 cm high. (12) Plants herbs. (14) Plants annual herbs, or
perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems
erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems sparsely
hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83)
Leaves distributed along the stems and in a basal rosette. (84) Leaves
alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 3-4 cm long.
(90) Leaves 4-10 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades circular. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally
dense on both surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched and hairs
branched. (119) Leaf blade venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases
attenuate, or hastate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (128) Leaf margins dentate.
(129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands all around leaf. (132) Leaf margins
with hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (137) Uppermost leaf or reduced bract
arising above the middle of the culm. (146) Inflorescence without involucral
bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence 30-50. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or
length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (252) Perianth present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4.
(256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2-2.5 mm long. (258) Sepals green and purple.
(259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent or white. (261)
Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266)
Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without
contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals
4-5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx.
(277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal
in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers 0.4-0.6 mm long. (293) Carpels
syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary
superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.3-0.4 mm long. (313) Stigmas
per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 40-60. (325) Fruit a
silique. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 2.5-4 mm long. (328)
Fruit 1-1.5 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 15-20 mm long. (330) Fruit
dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish, or green at maturity. (333)
Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.4-0.6 mm
long. (356) Seeds 40-60. (357) Seeds 1-1.2 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359)
Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = <16, 20>. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed
basic chromosome number of family x=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N.
(364) North American. (365) Arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United
States. (369) Canada: N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Mack.). (370) USA: Alaska.
(371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Ellesmere, or Banks. (373) Substrate type:
calcareous, or nitrophilous. (374) Wet meadows, or hummocks, or rocky sites,
or clay, or sand. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes,
or dry. (376) Substrate calcareous, or nitrophilous. (377) Substrate rock, or
gravel, or sand, or clay. (378) Substrate with low organic content, or with
high organic content. (379) Wet meadows, or slopes, or ridges, or cliffs.
(386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: bahamo.


Lesquerella arctica <(Wormsk) S.Wats.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts.
23: 254. 1888. (5) Alyssum arcticum Wornsk. Vesicaria arctica (Wormsk.)
Richardson Lesquerella arctica var. purshii S. Wats. Lesquerella purshii (S.
Wats.) Fern. Lesquerella arctica subsp. purshii (S. Wats.) A. Pors. Vesicaria
arctica var. leiocarpa Trautv. Vesicaria leiocarpa (Trautv.) N. Busch
Lesquerella arctica var. scammanae Rollins. (9) Plants bisexual. (10) Plants
less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 6-12 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the leaves.
(36) Stems densely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82)
Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves
not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 1.5-3 cm long. (90) Leaves
3-7 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades spatulate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105)
Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both
surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs stellate. (119) Leaf blade venation
appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat.
(127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins
without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute, or obtuse. (134) Conspicuous
hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems
hairy. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in
inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose.
(162) Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 3-8.
(193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne
on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252)
Perianth present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free.
(257) Sepals 4-4.5 mm long. (258) Sepals green. (259) Sepals hairy. (260)
Sepals hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals
non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals yellow. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals
obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed. (272) Petals 4.5-6 mm long. (273) Petals not
spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens
free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free
of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285)
Anthers 1-1.2 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely
fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307)
Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles
1-1.3 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317)
Ovules 6-8. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit spherical. (327) Fruit 4-6 mm
long. (328) Fruit 4-6 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 6-10 mm long.
(330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish and purple.
(333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 1.7-2.2 mm
long. (356) Seeds 6-8. (357) Seeds 1.8-2.2 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359)
Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = 60. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic
chromosome number of family X=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364)
Amphi-Beringian. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or
United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: B.C., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T.
(Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Que., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Banks, or Victoria, or King
William, or Southampton. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Rocky sites,
or sand. (375) Substrate dry. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate
rock, or gravel, or sand, or clay. (378) Substrate with low organic content.
(379) River terraces, or slopes, or ridges. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order Capparales.
(406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Capparales.
(413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: balear.


Parrya arctica <R.Br.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Chlor. Melvill. 196.
1823. (5) Parrya arctica R. Br. f. albiflora Boivin. (9) Plants bisexual. (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 1-10 cm high. (14) Plants perennial
herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a caudex. (18) Taproot
present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the leaves. (36) Stems
glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous.
(83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 1.2-3
cm long. (90) Leaves 3-5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades spatulate. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation appearing
single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (128) Leaf
margins dentate, or entire. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf
apices obtuse. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems
without leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (146) Inflorescence without
involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis
glabrous. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 6-12. (193) Flowers medium-sized,
5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers
bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (252) Perianth present. (254) Sepals
present. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2.5-3 mm long. (258)
Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262)
Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals
free. (268) Petals white, or purple. (269) Petals without contrasting
markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 7-10 mm
long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277)
Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in
length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous.
(282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers 1 mm long. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294)
Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries
glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1.
(310) Styles 0.1 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation
parietal. (317) Ovules 6-8. (325) Fruit a silique. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327)
Fruit 6-25 mm long. (328) Fruit 3-6 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit
9-18 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple.
(333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.2-0.3 mm
long. (356) Seeds 6-8. (357) Seeds 2-2.3 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359)
Seeds winged. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family x=5-10. (363)
Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364) North American. (365) High arctic. (366)
Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere:
Canada. (369) Canada: N.W.T. (Frank.). (371) Arctic Islands: Ellesmere, or
Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or Victoria, or Prince of Wales, or
King William, or Southampton <Stefansson Is., Eglinton Is.>. (373) Substrate
type: calcareous. (374) Wet meadows, or moist areas <creek deltas>, or rocky
sites, or clay. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes, or
dry. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate gravel, or sand, or silt, or
clay. (379) Wet meadows, or hummocks, or river terraces, or slopes, or ridges.
(386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: bapaar.


Parrya nudicaulis <(L.) Boiss.>

      (2) Brassicaceae (Cruciferae), Draba family. (4) Bull. Soc. Imp.
Naturalistes Moscou 34, no. 3: 176. 1861. (5) Cardamine nudicaulis L. Arabis
nudicaulis (L.) DC Neuroloma nudiaule (L.) DC Cardamine articulata Pursh
Parrya macrocarpa R. Br. Parrya macrocarpa A aspera Hook. [PETER?. (9) Plants
bisexual. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 7-14 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a caudex.
(18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the leaves.
(36) Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles
absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette. (84) Leaves
alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not
lobed. (89) Leaves 3-10 cm long. (90) Leaves 12-24 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
circular. (97) Leaf blades leathery. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull.
(108) Leaf blades upper surface pilose. (109) Leaf blades adaxial surface
hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white. (113) Leaf blades abaxial
surface pilose. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse. (115) Leaf blades
abaxial surface hairs white. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched. (119)
Leaf blade venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126)
Leaf blades flat. (128) Leaf margins serrate. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or
glands all around leaf. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices
acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems without
leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (146) Inflorescence without involucral
bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence 7-12. (193) Flowers large, greater than 15 mm in diameter or
length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (252) Perianth present. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4.
(256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 5-7 mm long. (258) Sepals purple. (259) Sepals
glabrous. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals
present. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals purple. (269) Petals
without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals 2-lobed.
(272) Petals 12-15 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than
the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments
markedly unequal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens
filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (285) Anthers 2-2.5 mm long. (293)
Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296)
Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (310) Styles 0.8-1.1 mm long. (313) Stigmas
per style 1. (316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 8-12. (325) Fruit a
silique. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 15-20 mm long. (328)
Fruit 1.5-2 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 20-25 mm long. (330) Fruit
dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish and brown. (333) Fruit
glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting.
(336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 0.8-1.2 mm long. (356)
Seeds 8-12. (357) Seeds 1-1.2 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds
verrucose. (360) 2n = <14, 28>. (361) Rollins, 1993. (362) Supposed basic
chromosome number of family x=5-10. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4N. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United
States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or
Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Utah, or Wyo. (371) Arctic Islands: Victoria.
(373) Substrate type: acidic, or calcareous. (374) Wet meadows, or hummocks,
or snow beds, or rocky sites. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or on
seepage slopes, or dry. (376) Substrate acidic, or calcareous. (377) Substrate
gravel, or silt, or till, or moss. (378) Substrate with low organic content,
or with high organic content. (379) Wet meadows, or snow beds, or along
streams, or river terraces, or slopes, or ridges. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392) Dahlgren's Order
Capparales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Capparales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Dillenianae. (418) Takhtajan's Order Capparales. (431) Code used
for graphics files: bapanu.


Campanulaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Bluebell family. (2) Campanulaceae, bluebell family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Asteriflorae. (399) Dahlgren's
Order Campanulales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Asteridae. (412) Cronquist's
Order Campanulales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Asteridae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Asteranae. (420) Takhtajan's Order Campanulales. (421) 2000
species. (422) 90 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Campanula. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics
files: cm.


Campanula uniflora <L.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: cmcmun.


Campanula rotundifolia <L.>

      (2) Asteraceae, daisy family. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: cmcmro.


Caryophyllaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Pink family. (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Caryophylliflorae. (390) Dahlgren's
Order 1 1. Caryophyllales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Caryophyllidae. (409)
Cronquist's Order Caryophyllales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Caryophyllidae.
(414) Takhtajan's Superorder Caryophyllanae. (417) Takhtajan's Order
Caryophyllales. (421) 1750 species. (422) 88 genera. (423) Genera in study
region: Arenaria, Cerastium, Melandrium, Sagina, Silene, Stellaria. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics
files: ca.


Arenaria <L.>

      (1) Sandwort. (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: caar.


Arenaria capillaris <Poir.> subsp. capillaris

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) =Arenaria cappillaris var.
nardifolia (Ledeb.) Regel. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used
for graphics files: caarca.


Arenaria humifusa <Wahlenb.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) = Arenaria ciliata L. var.
humifusa (Wahlenb.) Hartman. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code
used for graphics files: caarhu.


Arenaria peploides <L.> var. diffusa <Hornem>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) =Honckenya peploides (L.) Ehrh.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
caarpe.


Arenaria nardifolia <Ledeb.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) =Arenaria capillaris Poir. subsp.
capillaris. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under
consideration. (431) Code used for graphics files: caarna.


Arenaria rossii <(R. Br.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) =Minuartia rossii (R. Br. ex
Richards. ) Graebn. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for
graphics files: caarro.


Arenaria rubella <(Wahlenb.) Sm.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) =Minuartia rubella (Wahlenb.)
Hiern. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
caarru.


Arenaria sajanensis <Willd.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) =Minuartia biflora (L.) Schinz &
Thellung. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics
files: caarsa.


Arenaria uliginosa <Schleich.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) =Minuartia michauxii (Fenzl) Farw.
var. michauxii. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for
graphics files: caarul.


Cerastium <L.>

      (1) Mouse-ear Chickweed. (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: cace.


Cerastium alpinum <L.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Two subspecies and five varieties
recognized in Kartesz (1994). (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code
used for graphics files: caceal.


Cerastium arcticum <Lge.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Five subspecies and numerous
varieites recorded in Kartesz (1994). (424) Morphological data not coded.
(431) Code used for graphics files: cacear.


Cerastium beeringianum <Cham. & Schlecht.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Three subspecies and three
varieties in Kartesz (1994). (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code
used for graphics files: cacebe.


Cerastium cerastoides <(L.) Britt.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Arenaria trigynum (Vill.) Shinners
Cerastium trigynum Vill. Dichodon cerastiodes (L.) Reichenb. Provencheria
cerastioides (L.) Boivin Stellaria cerastioides L. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: cacece.


Cerastium regelii <Ostf.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Two subspecies in Kartesz (1994).
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
cacere.


Honckenya peploides <(L.) Ehrh.> subsp. diffusa <(Hornem.) Hultén>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Arenaria diffusa (Hornem.) Wormsk.
Arenaria peploides (L.) var. diffusa (Hornem.) Wormsk. Honckenya diffusa
(Hornem.) A.& D. Löve. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under
consideration. (431) Code used for graphics files: cahope.


Melandrium <Roehl.>

      (1) Bladder-Campion. (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: came.


Melandrium affine <Roehl.>

      (1) Bladder-Campion. (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) =Silene
involucrata subsp. involucrata (Cham. & Sachlecht.) Bocquet. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: cameaf.


Melandrium apetalum <(L.) Frenzl.>

      (1) Bladder-Campion. (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Silene
uralensis subsp. uralensis (Rupr.) Bocquet. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: cameap.


Melandrium ostenfeldii <Porsild>

      (1) Bladder-Campion. (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) =Silene
taimyrensis (Tolm.) Bocquet. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status
under consideration. (431) Code used for graphics files: cameos.


Melandrium trifolium <(R.Br.ex Sommerf.) J. Vahl>

      (1) Bladder-Campion. (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) =Silene
sorensenis (Boivin) Bocquet. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code
used for graphics files: cametr.


Minuartia biflora (L.) <Schinz & Thellung>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Arenaria sajanensis Willd. ex
Schlecht. Lidia biflora (L.) A. & D. Löve Stellaria biflora L. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: camibi.


Minuartia michauxii <(Fenzl)> Farw. var. <michauxii>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Arenaria macra A. Nels. & J.F.
Macbr. Arenaria michauxi (Fenzl.) Hook. f. Arenaria stricta Michx. Arenaria
stricta subsp. macra (A. Nels & J.F. Macbr.) Maguire Arenaria stricta var.
puberulenta (M.E. Peck) C.L. Hithc. Arenaria uliginosa Schleich ex Lam. & DC
Minuopsis michauxii (Fenzl) W.A. Weber Sabulina stricta (Michx.) Small. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: camimi.


Minuartia rossii <(R. Br. ex Richards) Graebn.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Alsinanthe rossii (R. Br. ex
Richards. A.& D. Löve Alsinopsis rossii (R. Br. ex Richards. Rydb. Arenaria
rossii R. Br. ex Richards. Arenaria rossii var. daethiana Polunin Minuartia
rolfii Nannf. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics
files: camiro.


Minuartia rubella <(Wahlenb.) Hiern>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Arenaria propinqua Richards.
Arenaria rubella (Wahlenb.) Sm. Arenaria verna L. var. propinqua (Richards.)
Fern. Arenaria verna var. rubella (Wahlenb.) S. Wats. Minuartia rossii (R.
Br.ex Richards.) Graebn. var. orthotrichoides auct non (Schischkin) Hultén
Trypphane rubella (Wahlenb.) Reichenb. (424) Morphological data not coded.
(431) Code used for graphics files: casa.


Sagnia <L.>

      (1) Pearlwort. (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: casa.


Sagnia cespitosa <(J.Vahl) Lge.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Sagina nivalis (Lindbl.) Fries
var. caespitosa (J. Vahl) Boivin Spergella caespitosa (J. Vahl) A. & D. Löve.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
casace.


Sagnia intermedia <Fenzl.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) =Sagina nivalis (Lindbl.) Fries.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
casain.


Sagina nivalis <(Lindbl.) Fries>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Sagina intermedia Fenzl Spergella
intermedia (Fenzl) A. & D. Löve. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: casani.


Sagnia nodosa <(L.) Fenzl.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Three subspecies recognized by
Kartesz (1994). (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for
graphics files: casano.


Silene <L.>

      (1) Campion. (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: casi.


Silene acaulis var. exscapa <(All.) DC>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Silene acaulis subsp. arctica A. &
D. Löve. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics
files: casiac.


Silene involucrata <(C.& S.) Bocquet.> subsp. involucrata

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Gastrolychins affinis (J. Vahl ex
Fries) Tolm. & Kozh. Gastrolychnis involucrata (Chams. & Schlecht.) A.& D.
Löve Lychnis affinis J. Vahl ex Fries Lychnis gillettii Boivin Melandrium
affine (J. Vahl ex Fries) J. Vahl Melandrium furcatum (Raf.) Hadac Silene
furcata Raf. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under
consideration. (431) Code used for graphics files: casiin.


Silene sorensensis <(Boivin) Bocquet.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Lychnis sorensis Boivin Lycnis
triflora R. Br. ex Sommerf. Melandrium triflorum (R. Br. ex Sommerf.) J. Vahl.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (431)
Code used for graphics files: casiso.


Silene taimyrensis <(Tolm.) Bocquet>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Gastrolychnis ostenfeldii
(Porsild) Petrovsky Gastrolychnis taimyrensis (Tolm.) S.K. Czer Gastrolychnis
triflora (R. Br. ex Sommerf.) Tolm. & Kozh. subsp dawsonii (B.L. Robins) A. &
D. Löve Lychnis taimyrensis (Tolm.) Polunin Lychnis triflora var. dawsonii
B.L. Robins Melandrium ostenfeldii Porsild Melandrium taimyrense Tolm. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: casita.


Silene uralensis <(Rupr.) Bocquet.> subsp. uralensis

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Gastrolychnis apetala (L.) Tolm. &
Kozh. Gastrolychnis apetala subsp. arctica (Fries) A.D. Löve Gastrolychnis
apetala subsp. uralensis (Rupr.) Löve Lychnis apetala L., non Silene apetala
Willd. Lychnis apetala var. glabra Regel Melandrium apetalum (L.) Fenzl
Melandrium apetalum subsp. arcticum (Fries) Hultén Melandrium apetalum var.
glabrum (Regel) Hultén Silene wahlenbergella Chowdhuri Silene wahlbergella
subsp. arctica (Fries) Hultén. (426) Status under consideration. (431) Code
used for graphics files: casiur.


Silene uralensis <(Rupr.) Bocquet> subsp. uralensis

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Gastrolychnis apetala (L.) Tolm. &
Kozh. Gastrolychnis apetala subsp. arctica (Fries) A.& D. Löve Gastrolychnis
apetala subsp. uralensis (Rupr.) A. & D. Löve Gastrolychnis uralensis Rupr.
Lychnis apetala L. non Silene apetala Willd. Lychnis apetala var. arctica
(Fries) Cody. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics
files: casiur.


Stellaria ciliatosepala <Trautv.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) No synonymy in Kartesz (1994).
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
castci.


Sellaria crassipes <Hultén>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Stellaria edwardsii R. Br. var.
crassipes (Hultén) Boivin. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used
for graphics files: castcr.


Stellaria longipes <Goldie>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Stellaria laeta Richards.
Stellaria longipes subsp, montantha (Hultén) W. A. Weber Stellaria longipes
var. monantha (Hultén) Welsh Stellaria monantha Hultén For more extensisve
synonymy see Kartesz (1994). (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code
used for graphics files: castlo.


Stellaria humifusca <Rottb.>

      (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Alisine humifusa (Rottb.) Britt.
Stellaria humifusa var. oblongifolia Fenzl Stellaria humifusa var. suberecta
Boivin. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics
files: casthu.


Viscaria alpina <Roehl.>

      (1) Alpine-Campion. (2) Caryophyllaceae, pink family. (8) Name not in
Kartesz (1994). Mentioned in Porsild (1957) with synonymy Lychnis alpina as a
species to be looked for on Arctic Archipelago L. (384) Herbmats on
south-facing gravelly slopes. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Not
accepted in this study. (431) Code used for graphics files: cavial.


Crassulaceae <A.P. de Candolle>

      (1) Stonecrop family. (2) Crassulaceae, stonecrop family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order
Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Rosidae. (411) Cronquist's Order
Rosales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (421) 1150 species. (422) 40
genera. (423) Genera in study region: Adromisschus, Aeonium, Aichryson,
Bryophyllum, Chiastophyllum, Cotyledon, Crassula, Cremnophila, Diamorpha,
Dudleia, Echeveria, Graptopetalum, Greenovia, Hylotelephium, Hypagophytum,
Jovibarba, Kalanchoë, Lenophyllum, Meterostachys, Monanthes, Mucizonia,
Orostachys, Pachyphytum, Pagella, Parvisedum, Perrierosedum, Pistorinia,
Pseudosedum, Rhodiola, Rochea, Rosularia, Sedum, Sempervivum, Sinocrassula,
Telmissa, Thompsonella, Tylecodon, Umbilicus, Villadia. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: cr.


Sedum rosea <(L.) Scop.>

      (2) Crassulaceae, stonecrop family. (8) Rhodiola roanensis Britt.
Rhodiola rosea L. Sedum rosea var. roanese(Britt.) Berger. (9) Plants
dioecious. (11) Plants 5-20 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs <succulent,
dioecious>. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect <thick, fleshy, scaly,
fragrant when cut, sometimes numerous and leafy>. (36) Stems glabrous. (52)
Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (84) Leaves
alternate <sometimes pseudo-whorled>. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 1-4 cm
long. (90) Leaves 2-10 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades oblanceolate <somewhat spoon
shaped>. (97) Leaf blades succulent. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf
blade venation palmate. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (151) Inflorescence
fasciculate <dense clusters>. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter
or length <individual flowers>, or large, greater than 15 mm in diameter or
length <cluster of many flowers that might be interpreted as a single flower>.
(195) Flowers unisexual <flowers of the female plant bright yellow; those of
the male plants usually purple (Porsild 1957 has the colours the opposite way
around)>. (255) Sepals 4 <also 3 or 5 in Arctic specimens>. (256) Sepals free.
(267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow <female>, or purple <male>. (272)
Petals 1.5-2.5 mm long. (277) Stamens 6-10 <or more>. (293) Carpels
apocarpous. (294) Carpels free. (295) Carpels 3-6. (296) Ovary superior. (317)
Ovules 1 <to a few>. (325) Fruit a follicle <3-6 folicules>. (326) Fruit
elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 4-6 mm long. (328) Fruit 3-5 mm wide. (330)
Fruit fleshy. (331) Fruit dehiscent <opening dorsally>. (332) Fruit red <to
pale red, plump, erect>. (333) Fruit hairy. (357) Seeds 0.5-1 mm long
<?decribed as “small” Cronquist 1981>. (360) 2n = <22, 10 counts in Löve &
Löve, 1975 for R. rosea>. (364) Amphi-Atlantic. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin
<Island, single Arctic Archipelago record from Beekman Peninsula, S.E. Baffin
Island, 63°24'N, 113°W>. (383) The succulent young stems and leaves of the
roseroot are edible and may be used as salad or pot-herb. Where present the
roseroot is generally abundant and provides a palitable and readily available
vegetable. (384) ?. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass
Rosidae. (411) Cronquist's Order Rosales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae.
(414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales.
(421) 1500 species. (422) 40 genera. (431) Code used for graphics files:
crsero.


Cyperaceae <A. L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Sedge family. (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (9) Plants monoecious,
or dioecious, or bisexual. (11) Plants 2-50 cm high <?>. (14) Plants perennial
herbs. (17) Plants vegetatively proliferating by bulbils <by horizonatal
rooting stems>. (57) Petioles absent. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals
absent. (265) Petals absent. (316) Placentation basal. (385) Represented by 5
genera, Carex, Eleocharis, Eliophurum, Kobresia, and Scirpus. (386) Subclass
Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder Commeliniflorae. (405) Dahlgren's
Order Cyperales. (421) 1500 species. (422) 120 genera. (423) Genera in study
region: Carex, Eleocharis, Eriophorum, Kobresia, Scirpus. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: cy.


Carex <L.>

      (1) Sedge. (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (57) Petioles absent. (93) Leaf
blades linear. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (252) Perianth absent.
(254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (316) Placentation basal. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (425) Genus. (428) Sectional sequence proposed
by the Flora of North America project: subgenus Vignea (P. Beauv. ex Lestib.
fil.) Peterm. sect. Chordorrhiza (Fries) Mackenzie C. chordorrhiza Ehrh. sect.
Physoglochin Dumorties (1827). C. gynocrates Wormsk. ex Drej. sect. Foetidae
(=sect. Dioicae) (L.H. Bailey) Kükenthal C. maritima Gunn sect. Glareosae G.
Don (1830) (=sect. Heleonastes), C. lachenallii Schkuhr, C. glareosa Wahlenb.
C. marina Dewey, C. ursina Dewey sect. Ovales Kunth (1837). This name is
predated by sect. Cyperoideae Cr. Don. (1830), but Flora Europaea separates
the sections. C. macloviana d’Urv. subgenus Carex sect. Phacocystis Dumortier
(1827). C. aquatilis Wahlenb. var. stans (Drej.) Boott, C. bigelowii Torr. ex.
Schwein, C. lugens Holm, C. subspathacea Wormsk. ex Hornem. C. rufina Drej.
sect. Atratae (= Acutae + Cryptocarpae) Christ (1885). C. holostoma Drej., C.
norvegica Retz. sect. Limosae (O.F. Lang) Kükenthal C. rariflora (Wahlenb.)
Sm. sect. Racemosae G. Don (1830) = (Bicolores). C. bicolor All. sect.
Paniceae G. Don (1830). C. vaginata Tausch sect. Hymenochlaenae Bailey (1886)
= Gracillimae + Sylvaticae + Longirostres, + Cappillares. C. capillaris L., C.
williamsii Britt. sect. Aulocystis Dumortier (1827) (=Ferruginae). C.
atrofusca Schk., C. fuliginosa Schkuhr, C. petricosa Dew. sect. Vesicariae
Carey (1848). C. membranacea Hook. C. saxatilis L. (including C. phsocarpa
Presl sect. Leucoglochin Dumortier (1827). (= Orthocerates). C. microglochin
Wahlenb. sect. Scirpinae (Tuckerm.) Kükenthal, C. scirpoidea Michx. sect.
Lamprochlaenae (Drej.) Bailey (1886) (=Obtusatae). C. obtusata Liljeb., C.
supina Willd. ex Wahlenb. var. spaniocarpa (Steud.) Boivin sect. Petreae (O.F.
Lang) Kükenthal (=Rupestres). C. gracialis Mackenzie, C. rupestris All. sect.
Nardinae Kükenthal sect. Capitatae Mackenzie C. capitata Sol. (431) Code used
for graphics files: cyca.


Carex aquatilis <Wahlenb.> var. stans <(Drej.) Boott>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Phacocystis Dumortier. (8) Carex
aquatilis subsp. stans (Drej.) Hultén. Carex stans Drej. (9) Plants
monoecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high <rarely less than 15 cm high>.
(11) Plants (5-)15-30(-40) cm high. (15) Plants forming loose clusters, or
tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with conspicuously long
horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous. (28) Stem scales
present <light brown and striate>. (32) Stems erect, or decumbent <new
growth>. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves <usually>. (34) Stems
not filiform. (35) Stems triangular in cross section <hollow in the center>.
(36) Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy <slightly>. (57) Petioles absent. (68)
Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths persisting <breaking
down into fibers after more than a year>. (70) Sheaths forming a conspicuous
build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths brown, or reddish <sometimes
pale purplish>. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves
3-10(-25) cm long. (90) Leaves (0.5-)1.5-4.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(95) Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (122) Leaf blades septate nodulose <seen on the adaxial
surface at 10X>. (126) Leaf blades flat, or revolute, or folded <loosely>.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence conspicuous and leaf-like. (140) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence extending beyond the
inflorescence. (141) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence 3-12 cm long <<uppermost culm leaves>>. (142) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath shorter than the
blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate.
(153) Inflorescence 2-5 spikes. (156) Individual spike(s) ascending. (157)
Inflorescence lateral spikes borne on pedicels. (158) Pedicels smooth. (160)
Inflorescence (2-)4-10(-12) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-15 mm wide. (168)
Terminal spike wholly staminate. (197) Staminate flowers conspicuous. (198)
Floral bracts as long as the gynoecium <green perigynia visible around the
darker scales>. (199) Floral bracts black <purplish>. (200) Floral bracts with
margins the same colour as the body of the bract. (202) Floral bracts obtuse.
(205) Floral bracts 1.5-2 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 0.7-0.9 mm wide. (207)
Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265)
Petals absent. (285) Anthers 2.8-3.2 mm long. (311) Styles slender, not
extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 2. (316) Placentation
basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338)
Perigynia broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 2.2-2.8(-3.2) mm long. (340)
Perigynia 1.2-1.6 mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or
ascending. (343) Perigynia golden brown, or green <blotched>. (344) Perigynia
membranous. (345) Perigynia surface glossy. (346) Perigynia glabrous. (347)
Perigynia papillose. (348) Perigynia appearing nerveless. (351) Perigynia with
2 keels. (352) Perigynia apex beaked with a short beak. (354) Achenes filling
the perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular. (360) 2n = 76. (364) North American.
(365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371)
Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Axel Heiberg, Parry Islands,
Cornwallis, Banks, Victoria, King William, Southampton, and Coats <as well as
Vansittart, Igloolik, and Prince Charles Islands>. (373) Substrate type:
calcareous, or peat. (374) Wet meadows, or moist areas <often found at the
margins of ponds, in and along streams, on river terraces, on beaches and
swales near lake shores, in marshes, willow thickets and on seepage slopes. It
is typically abundant locally, and is often the dominant species in sedge
meadows.>. (375) Substrate aquatic, or imperfectly drained, or on seepage
slopes. (376) Substrate calcareous, or halophytic. (377) Substrate rock
<carbonate plates, cobble, or bare bedrock>, or gravel, or sand, or silt, or
clay, or till <or various combinations of the above>. (378) Substrate peat
<with Sphagnum>, or with low organic content <e.g., on bare wet sand>, or with
high organic content. (379) Wet meadows <sometimes below snow banks>, or
hummocks <frost boils>, or around the margins of ponds, or depressions of low
centre polygons, or marshes <often extensive>, or along streams <on poorly
drained sandy berms; also on the sides of steep gullies>, or river terraces,
or lake shores <plants emergent, or in moist areas>, or tundra, or sea shore
<in coastal flats, beach ridges and swales, and by the mouths of streams>.
(380) Often locally dominant in mixed Carex and Eriophorum meadows,often
grazed by musk oxen; also found with low Salix shrubs, Arctophila fulva,
Dupontia fisherii, and occasionally Sphagnum. These meadows are often grazed
by musk oxen. Although most often a plant of moist places, C. aquatilis var.
stans can occasionally be found in dry slopes and plains. From a broader
geologic perspective, this species is found on silty till plains, and alluvial
outwash. It has been reported on the sides of drumlins and on colluvium slopes
at the bases of cliffs. (385) In Porsild (1957) as C. stans Drej. (430)
Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex, Distigmatae. (431) Code used for
graphics files: cycaaq.


Carex atrofusca <Schk.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex sect. Aulocystis Dumortier. (8) Kartesz
(1994) recognizes two varieties, var. atrofusca and var. major (Boeckl.)
Raymond. C. ustutata Wahl. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm
high <usually>. (11) Plants (6-)15-30 cm high. (15) Plants tufted <loosely>.
(20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with short horizontal stems, or without
easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems decumbent.
(33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (35) Stems triangular in
cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths
tapering into the blade. (69) Sheaths persisting <breaking into fibers after
the first year>. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the base
of the plant. (71) Sheaths brown. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly
basal. (89) Leaves 2-13 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.5-3.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf
blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat, or revolute <glaucous>. (135)
Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence much reduced, or scale-like <often bristle pointed>.
(140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence shorter
than the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence 1-2(-2.5) cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath shorter than the
blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate.
(153) Inflorescence 2-4 spikes. (156) Individual spike(s) pendent. (157)
Inflorescence lateral spikes borne on pedicels. (158) Pedicels smooth
<capillary>. (160) Inflorescence 2-3.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 20-30 mm
wide. (168) Terminal spike wholly staminate, or staminate at the apex, or
pistilate <club-shaped, rarely two spikes with staminate flowers>. (197)
Staminate flowers conspicuous <usually>. (198) Floral bracts as long as the
gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts black <sometimes pale towards the midvien or
the apex>. (200) Floral bracts with margins the same colour as the body of the
bract. (202) Floral bracts ovate, or lanceolate <bristle-tipped>. (205) Floral
bracts 3.5-4.5 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 0.7-1 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts
glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent.
(285) Anthers 1.5-3.5 mm long. (311) Styles slender, not extending beyond the
beak. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit
surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia broadly
ovate. (339) Perigynia 3-4.5 mm long. (340) Perigynia 2-2.5(-3) mm wide. (341)
Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or ascending. (343) Perigynia black.
(344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia
glabrous. (348) Perigynia appearing nerveless. (351) Perigynia not keeled
<scaberulous towards the apex>. (352) Perigynia apex beaked with a long beak.
(353) Perigynia apex deeply bidentate. (354) Achenes not filling the upper
part of the perigynia. (355) Achenes triangular. (360) 2n = 38 and 40. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367)
Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Banks, Victoria,
Southampton, and Coats. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Wet meadows,
or moist areas <stream margins, lake shores; wet sand or gravel. Sometimes
found in saturated peat or muck>. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or on
seepage slopes. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate gravel, or sand,
or silt, or till <often on till plains>. (378) Substrate with high organic
content, or peat <occasionally>. (379) Wet meadows, or hummocks <mossy>, or
marshes, or along streams, or river terraces, or lake shores, or tundra. (380)
Typically sparse or uncommon; found with other sedges such as C. membranaceae
and C. aquatilis var. stans. It can occur in areas extensively grazed by musk
oxen. (385) Porsild (1957) recognized the taxon at the specific level.
Specimens with two staminate spikes CAN 23127, CAN 483451. Specimen with a
subterminal spike, with both staminate and pistillate flowers, CAN 483450.
Variety major is considered to be no more than larger plants from more
favourable environments (P. Ball personal communication April 1998. (428) One
of the collections describes "wet meadow" as "poorly drained silt with small
amounts of organics at the surface". We have assumed it's high organic
content. (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex (Tristamatae). (431)
Code used for graphics files: cycaat.


Carex bicolor <All.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Racemosae G. Don. (5) No synonymy
in Kartesz (1994). (8) None. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants less than 15
cm high <on Arctic islands>. (11) Plants (3.5-)7-12(-20) cm high. (15) Plants
tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with short horizontal stems, or
without easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem scales absent. (32) Stems
decumbent <often recurved or spreading>. (33) Stems about as high as the
leaves, or conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems filiform <0.2-0.3
mm in diameter>. (35) Stems triangular in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous
<slightly scabrous at the apex>. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths tapering
into the blade. (69) Sheaths breaking down into fibres. (70) Sheaths not
forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths green
<soon fading to pallid-brown>. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly basal.
(89) Leaves 1-7 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-1(-2) mm wide <flat>. (93) Leaf
blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous
<glaucous>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades strongly
keeled. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence present <equalling or slightly longer than
the inflorescence>. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence conspicuous and leaf-like, or much reduced, or scale-like <very
variable in this character>. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence extending beyond the inflorescence, or similar in
length to the inflorescence, or shorter than the apex of the inflorescence.
(141) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 0.2-1 cm
long. (142) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
with sheath shorter than the blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate.
(152) Inflorescence multispicate <rarely unispicate>. (153) Inflorescence 1-3
spikes. (156) Individual spike(s) ascending. (157) Inflorescence lateral
spikes borne on pedicels <that are sometimes very short>. (158) Pedicels
smooth. (160) Inflorescence 1-1.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-10 mm wide.
(168) Terminal spike staminate at the base. (197) Staminate flowers
inconspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral
bracts brown, or black <reddish>. (200) Floral bracts with margins darker in
colour than the midvein. (202) Floral bracts ovate. (205) Floral bracts
1.9-2.5(-3.8) mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.2-1.4 mm wide. (207) Floral
bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals
absent. (285) Anthers 1.3-1.6 mm long. (311) Styles slender, extending beyond
the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 2. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit
surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia broadly
ovate, or elliptic. (339) Perigynia 1.8-2.2 mm long. (340) Perigynia 1.1-1.5
mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or ascending. (343)
Perigynia straw-coloured, or green. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345)
Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous. (347) Perigynia papillose
<seen at 10-40X>. (348) Perigynia appearing nerveless <or very finely nerved>.
(351) Perigynia with 2 keels. (352) Perigynia apex merely conical. (354)
Achenes filling the perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular. (360) 2n = 50 and 52.
(364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Iqaluit (new
since Porsild, 1957), Kimmirut, and Dorset Island>, or Southampton <Coral
Harbour and Duke of York Bay>, or Coats <Cairn Cove; the latter two are new
records since Porsild, 1957>. (374) Wet meadows, or moist areas <wet sand by
brooks and lake shores>. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained. (376) Substrate
calcareous. (377) Substrate sand, or silt. (378) Substrate with low organic
content, or with high organic content. (379) Wet meadows, or around the
margins of ponds, or tundra, or sea shore <on upper sandy beaches>. (380)
Typically found in small patches with other Carex. (385) Porsild (1957). (430)
Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex, Bistigmatae. (431) Code used for
graphics files: cycabc.


Carex bigelowii <Torr. ex Schwein> subsp. bigelowii

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Phacocystis Dumortier. (5) Carex
bigelowii subsp. hyperborea (Drej.) Bocher Carex consimilis Holm Carex rigida
Good Carex anguillata Drej. Carex bigelowii forma anguillata (Drej.) Fern. (8)
Carex bigelowii subsp. hyperborea (Drej.) Böcher Carex consimilis Holm . (9)
Plants monoecious. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high
<usually, coarse>. (11) Plants 3-20(-30) cm high. (15) Plants tufted. (20)
Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous. (28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems
erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (35) Stems triangular
in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths
abruptly contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths persisting <first year>, or
breaking down into fibres <with age>. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous
build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or brown. (75)
Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves (4-)8-16(-20) cm long.
(90) Leaves 0.5-2.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades
straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous <strongly ribbed>. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (122) Leaf blades not septate nodulose <distinguishes this
species from C. aquatilis>. (126) Leaf blades flat, or revolute. (135)
Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence conspicuous and leaf-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence similar in length to the
inflorescence, or shorter than the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 2.5-3.5 cm long. (142)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath
shorter than the blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with
the inflorescence persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence
multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 2-3(-4) spikes. (156) Individual spike(s)
ascending. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes borne on pedicels <usually
pistillate, but occasionally with a few staminate flowers>. (158) Pedicels
smooth. (160) Inflorescence (1.5-)3-6(-8) cm long. (161) Inflorescence
(5-)10-15 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike wholly staminate <usually>. (197)
Staminate flowers conspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium.
(199) Floral bracts black. (200) Floral bracts with margins darker in colour
than the midvein <midvien light brown or green>. (202) Floral bracts obtuse.
(205) Floral bracts 2.5-3.5 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.2-2 mm wide. (207)
Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265)
Petals absent. (285) Anthers 3.3-3.7 mm long. (311) Styles slender, not
extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 2 <rarely 3, CAN 283966>.
(316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit
an achene. (338) Perigynia broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 2.3-3 mm long. (340)
Perigynia 1.3-1.7 mm wide. (341) Perigynia borne on a stalk <0.15-0.45 mm
long>. (342) Perigynia erect or ascending. (343) Perigynia green <often with
purple spots at the apex>. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface
dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous. (347) Perigynia papillose. (348) Perigynia
appearing nerveless. (351) Perigynia with 2 keels. (352) Perigynia apex merely
conical. (354) Achenes filling the perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular. (360)
2n = 68 and 70 <Faulkner, 1972>. (364) Circumpolar <some authors>, or
amphi-Atlantic <Porsild, 1957>. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, and Ellesmere <as
well as Digges and Resolution Islands>. (374) Moist areas <typically dry,
turfy places>, or moist areas <where the plants become taller and occasionally
have longer and more lax-flowered pistillate spikes>. (375) Substrate dry, or
imperfectly drained <less commonly>. (377) Substrate rock, or gravel, or sand.
(378) Substrate with low organic content. (379) Hummocks <mossy>, or along
streams, or tundra <often windswept>, or slopes, or ridges <also raised sandy
beaches>, or cliffs. (380) Typically found in high, dry ledges and ridges;
also in sandy areas between boulders. Common associates in this habitat are
Empetrum and Arctostaphylos. Carex bigelowii also occurs in meadows with other
Carex and with Eriophorum. Somewhat less commonly found in moist tundra and
along streams. (384) In moist areas, the plants become taller and occasionally
have longer and more lax-flowered pistillate spikes (Porsild and Cody, 1980).
Chater (1980) noted that this is an extremely variable species whose
infraspecific taxonomy is confused by its apparent similarity to small
variants of Carex aqualilis in the arctic, by the occurance of numerous
hybrids, and by the fact that published work on it has never taken full
account of the variation over the full range. Carex bigelowii is self
compatible, but protandry limits pollination within flowering shoots (Jonsson
et al., 1996). A study of genetic diversity using allozyme electrophoresis
revealed extensive genetic diversity, and indicates high levels of outbreeding
in the past. Today, the species produces many seeds and has a large, long
lived seed bank; yet very little seedling recruitment has been observed. In
Iceland seedling recruitment has been observed only in disturbed sites.
Reproduction is mainly by clonal growth. The long internodes of the rhizomes
break down over time resulting in a large number of independant fragments with
the same genetic composition (Jonsson et al., 1996). (385) Porsild (1957).
McLaren (1964) indicated that C. anguillata was an addition to the flora of
the Arctic Archipelago. Two specimens that he collected on Baffin Island at
Ogac Lake are at CAN. They are relatively delicate plants but within the
concept of C. bigelowii. CAN 204794, collected from the head of Clyde Inlet,
Baffin Island, was annotated by Porsild (1958) as ?anguillata (Drej.) Fern; "a
peculiar form in which the terminal spikes are female at most with 1-2 male
flowers near the summit". (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex,
Bistagmatae. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycabg.


Carex bigelowii <Torr. ex Schwein> subsp. lugens <(Holm) Egorova>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Phacocystis Dumortier. (5) Carex
lugens Holm. (8) Carex lugens Holm. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants more
than 15 cm high <usually>. (11) Plants (8-)15-35(-40) cm high. (15) Plants
tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with short horizontal stems, or
without easily seen horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous, or
stoloniferous <elongated stems tending to be vertical rather than horizontal>.
(28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller
than the leaves. (34) Stems not filiform <1-1.6 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems
triangular in cross section. (36) Stems sparsely hairy <on the angles>. (57)
Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths tapering into the blade. (69) Sheaths
persisting. (70) Sheaths forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the
plant. (71) Sheaths brown, or reddish. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves
mostly basal. (89) Leaves 4-22 cm long. (90) Leaves 1-2 mm wide. (93) Leaf
blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades hairy <scaberulous
on the midrib and margins>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (122) Leaf
blades not septate nodulose <distinguishing this species from C. aquatilis>.
(126) Leaf blades flat, or revolute, or folded. (135) Flowering stems with
leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
much reduced, or scale-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence shorter than the apex of the inflorescence <usually>.
(141) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 0.7-3.2
cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
with sheath shorter than the blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate.
(152) Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 3-4 spikes. (154)
Inflorescence oblong, or ovate <pistillate spikes>, or linear <staminate
spike>. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes
borne on pedicels. (158) Pedicels scabrous. (160) Inflorescence 2-5 cm long.
(161) Inflorescence 10-20 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike wholly staminate.
(197) Staminate flowers conspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the
gynoecium, or as long as the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts black <purplish>.
(200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than
the adjacent area of the bract <margins hyaline, midvien narrow and green>.
(201) Floral bracts not reflexed <spreading at maturity>. (202) Floral bracts
ovate. (205) Floral bracts 2-3.5 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1-2 mm wide.
(207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent.
(265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 2.5-3 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and
short. (313) Stigmas per style 2. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit
surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia broadly
ovate. (339) Perigynia 2.5-3 mm long. (340) Perigynia 1.4-1.8 mm wide. (341)
Perigynia sessile <stipe less than 0.15 mm long>. (342) Perigynia erect or
ascending. (343) Perigynia black <purplish mottled with green towards the
base, uniformly purple brown at the apex>. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345)
Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous. (347) Perigynia papillose.
(348) Perigynia appearing nerveless. (351) Perigynia not keeled. (352)
Perigynia apex merely conical. (354) Achenes filling the perigynia. (355)
Achenes lenticular. (360) 2n = 80. (364) North American <Northwest America>.
(365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367)
Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Banks <Sachs Harbour and Masik River, the latter
is a new record since Porsild, 1957>, or Victoria <Prince Albert Sound and
Holman>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous <moderately to imperfectly drained>.
(374) Moist areas <on riverbanks, along streams, and in marshy or shrubby
tundra>. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained. (377) Substrate silt, or till.
(378) Substrate peat <older deposits>, or with high organic content. (379)
Marshes, or river terraces, or tundra <shrubby or marshy>. (385) = C. lugens
Holm, Porsild (1957). (431) Code used for graphics files: cycalu.


Carex capillaris <L.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Hymenochlaenae Bailey. (5) Carex
capillaris subsp. chlorostachys (Stev.) A. & D. Löve & Raymond Carex
capillaris subsp. robustior (Drej. ex Lange) Böcher Carex capillaris var.
elongata Olney ex Fern. Carex capillaris var. major Blytt. (8) Carex
capillaris subsp. chlorostachys (Stev.) A. & D. Löve Carex capillaris subsp.
robustior (Drej.) ex Lange) Böcher Carex capillaris var. elongata lney ex
Fern. Carex capillaris var. major Byltt. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants
less than 15 cm high <usually>. (11) Plants (2-)5-15(-20) cm high. (15) Plants
tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants without easily seen horizontal
stems. (28) Stem scales absent. (32) Stems decumbent <especially the
peduncles>. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems
filiform <0.3-0.5 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths tapering into
the blade. (69) Sheaths breaking down into fibres. (70) Sheaths not forming a
conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths brown, or green
<hyaline>. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly basal <yellow-green>. (89)
Leaves 3-8 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-2(-3) mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(95) Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous <or minutely
scaberulous>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat, or
involute, or folded. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence conspicuous and leaf-like.
(140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence shorter
than the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence (1-)1.5-4 cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath shorter than the
blade <usually enclosing the pedicels>. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate.
(152) Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 3-5 spikes. (156)
Individual spike(s) erect <initially>, or pendent <the lowermost often remote
and concealed among the leaves>. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes borne on
pedicels <long and capillary>. (158) Pedicels smooth. (160) Inflorescence
2-6(-7) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 10-30 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike
staminate at the base, or wholly staminate. (197) Staminate flowers
inconspicuous <often absent on herbarium specimens>. (198) Floral bracts
shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts orange brown. (200) Floral
bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent
area of the bract. (202) Floral bracts ovate, or obtuse. (204) Floral bracts
falling early. (205) Floral bracts 1.5-2 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1-1.5 mm
wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals
absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1-2 mm long. (311) Styles slender,
not extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation
basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338)
Perigynia sub-lanceolate, or elliptic. (339) Perigynia 1.8-2.3 mm long. (340)
Perigynia 0.8-1.2 mm wide. (341) Perigynia borne on a stalk. (342) Perigynia
erect or ascending, or spreading at maturity. (343) Perigynia golden brown.
(344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface glossy. (346) Perigynia
glabrous <scabrous near apex>. (348) Perigynia faintly nerved. (352) Perigynia
apex beaked with a long beak. (353) Perigynia apex oblique, becoming slightly
bidentate. (354) Achenes filling the perigynia. (355) Achenes triangular.
(360) 2n = 54. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Ellesmere,
Victoria, and Coats. (373) Substrate type: calcareous <clay and sand>. (374)
Wet meadows <in wet tundra and by alpine brooks>. (375) Substrate dry <more
commonly>, or imperfectly drained. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate
gravel, or sand, or silt, or till. (378) Substrate with low organic content,
or with high organic content. (379) Around the margins of ponds, or along
streams, or tundra, or slopes. (380) Found in drier habitats typically with
Dryas integrifolium, Epilobium latifolium, and Oxytropis maydelliana. (385)
Porsild 1957 noted that this is a very variable species and distinguished
between C. capillaris s.s. and var. major both in the Arctic Archipelago. He
dismissed var. elongata as not in the area. Carex capillaris var. major is
just a larger form from more sheltered locations and probably has no genetic
basis (P. Ball, personal communication, (1998. (428) Porsild, 1957 mapped a
single record on Ellemere Island (Hot Weather Creek), two records on
Southampton Island, and three records on Baffin Island that we have not
traced. (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex, Tristigmatae. (431)
Code used for graphics files: cycaca.


Carex capitata <Sol.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Capitatae Mackenzie. (5) Carex
capitata subsp. arctogena (H. Sm.) Hiitonen Carex arctogena H.Sm. (8) Carex
capitata L. subsp. capitata Carex capitata subsp. arctogena H. Sm. Carex
arctogena . H. Sm. Carex capitata var. arctogena (H. Sm.) Hultén. (9) Plants
monoecious. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high <Arctic Islands>, or more than 15
cm high <Continental Northwest Territories>. (11) Plants 4-10(-25) cm high.
(15) Plants tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown, or black. (21) Plants without
easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems erect. (33)
Stems about as high as the leaves, or conspicuously taller than the leaves.
(34) Stems filiform <0.4-0.6 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems triangular in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths forming a
conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or
green. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 5-10(-15)
cm long. (90) Leaves 0.3-0.7 mm wide <filiform>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95)
Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades hairy <scaberulous on midvein and
margins>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades triangular in
cross section, or folded. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (138) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence absent. (151)
Inflorescence spicate, or head-like. (152) Inflorescence a single spike. (154)
Inflorescence globose or subglobose. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160)
Inflorescence 0.5-0.8(-1) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 4-6 mm wide. (168)
Terminal spike staminate at the apex. (197) Staminate flowers conspicuous
<forming a small projecting tuft at the top of the spike>. (198) Floral bracts
shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts orange brown. (200) Floral
bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent
area of the bract <margins a wide translucent zone>. (202) Floral bracts
ovate. (205) Floral bracts 1.5-2.5 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.5-2 mm wide.
(207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent.
(265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1-1.5 mm long. (311) Styles slender,
extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 2. (316) Placentation
basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338)
Perigynia broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 1.9-2.5(-3.5) mm long. (340)
Perigynia 1.5-2 mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or
ascending. (343) Perigynia straw-coloured, or green <pale>. (344) Perigynia
membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous. (348)
Perigynia appearing nerveless. (349) Perigynia inflated. (352) Perigynia apex
beaked with a long beak. (353) Perigynia apex oblique, becoming slightly
bidentate. (354) Achenes not filling the upper part of the perigynia. (355)
Achenes lenticular. (360) 2n = 50. (364) Amphi-Atlantic. (365) Low arctic.
(366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin <There is a single record of the species collected from Baffin
Island, Pangnirtung, (CAN 392202), new since Porsild, 1957>. (374) Rocky sites
<beside rivers, in beach lines of humus, in low tundra and peaty humus>. (375)
Substrate imperfectly drained. (378) Substrate with high organic content.
(379) River terraces, or tundra. (385) Treated as Carex arctogena H.Sm.,
Porsild (1957). P. Ball (personal communication, 1997) indicated that subsp.
arctogena is not a recognizable entity. Carex capitata is very rare in the
Arctic Islands. The collection at Pangnirtung, Baffin Island indicates a
northward range extension since Porsild's (1957) map which had only a
collection at Kimmirut. (428) Porsild (1957) mapped a single record from
Kimmirut (Lake Harbour) that we have not traced. (430) Section used by Porsild
(1957): Primocarex. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycacp.


Carex chordorrhiza <Ehrh. ex L.f.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Vignea, sect. Chordorrhizae (Fries) Mackenzie.
(8) No synonymy in Kartesz (1994). (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants less
than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 7-20(-25) cm high. (15)
Plants single-stemmed. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with conspicuously
long horizontal stems. (22) Plants stoloniferous <to 1 m long>. (28) Stem
scales present <sometimes leaf-like along the stolons>. (32) Stems erect. (33)
Stems about as high as the leaves, or conspicuously taller than the leaves.
(34) Stems not filiform <0.8-1.5 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems triangular in
cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths
tapering into the blade. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths not forming a
conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths green. (75)
Ligules present. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 2-10 cm
long. (90) Leaves 0.5-2.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades
straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel.
(126) Leaf blades folded. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence present <easily
overlooked>. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence much reduced, or scale-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence shorter than the apex of the inflorescence.
(141) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 0.2-1 cm
long. (142) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
with sheath shorter than the blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence persistent <but withering early>. (151)
Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence
2-5(-8) spikes. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (157) Inflorescence lateral
spikes sessile. (160) Inflorescence 0.8-1.2 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 2-8
mm wide. (168) Terminal spike staminate at the base. (197) Staminate flowers
inconspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral
bracts orange brown. (200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein
paler in colour than the adjacent area of the bract. (201) Floral bracts not
reflexed <spreading to 90° at maturity>. (202) Floral bracts lanceolate. (205)
Floral bracts 2.5-3.2(-3.5) mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.4-2 mm wide. (207)
Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265)
Petals absent. (285) Anthers 2-2.5 mm long. (311) Styles slender, not
extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 2. (316) Placentation
basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338)
Perigynia broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 2.8-3.2 mm long. (340) Perigynia
1.3-1.7 mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile <or on a very short stalk>. (342)
Perigynia spreading at maturity. (343) Perigynia brown, or green. (344)
Perigynia membranous <relatively thick>. (345) Perigynia surface glossy. (346)
Perigynia glabrous. (348) Perigynia strongly nerved. (352) Perigynia apex
beaked with a short beak. (354) Achenes filling the perigynia. (355) Achenes
lenticular. (360) 2n = 60 and 66. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (366)
Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin <Iqaluit, Kimmirut>, or Victoria <Cambridge Bay and Tahoe
Lake>. (374) Wet meadows <wet sedge marshy tundra>. (375) Substrate aquatic,
or imperfectly drained. (377) Substrate sand, or silt. (378) Substrate with
low organic content, or with high organic content. (379) Around the margins of
ponds, or along streams, or tundra, or sea shore <on beaches>. (380)
Occasional to rare in wet tundra (Porsild, 1957), but can be dominant by pond
margins, where it can be found with Hippurus vulgaris and Ranunculus pallasii
It can also act as a sand binder on beaches. (385) Porsild 1957. (430) Section
used by Porsild (1957): Vignea. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycach.


Carex fuliginosa <Schkuhr>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Aulocystis Dumortier. (8) Carex
misandra R. Br. Carex fuliginosa Schkuhr subsp. misandra (R. Br.) Nyman. (9)
Plants monoecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high <usually>. (11) Plants
(5-)15-25(-40) cm high. (15) Plants tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21)
Plants without easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem scales absent. (32)
Stems decumbent. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems
filiform <somewhat flexuous>. (35) Stems triangular in cross section. (36)
Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into
the blades. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths forming a conspicuous build
up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths green <with broad, hyaline margins>.
(75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 3-8 cm long. (90)
Leaves 1.5-3 mm wide <flat>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades
somewhat curled. (105) Leaf blades glabrous <over most of the surface>, or
hairy <scaberulous on the margins, especially near the apex>. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat, or folded. (135) Flowering stems
with leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence present <usually>. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence conspicuous and leaf-like, or much reduced,
or scale-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence shorter than the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 0.5-5 cm long. (142)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath
shorter than the blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with
the inflorescence persistent <but sometimes withering early>. (151)
Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence
(2-)3-4(-5) spikes. (156) Individual spike(s) pendent. (157) Inflorescence
lateral spikes borne on pedicels. (158) Pedicels smooth <and capillary>. (160)
Inflorescence 4-9(-12) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 10-40(-50) mm wide. (168)
Terminal spike staminate at the base. (197) Staminate flowers inconspicuous.
(198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium <slightly>. (199) Floral bracts
brown, or black <paler to hyaline at the apex>. (200) Floral bracts with
margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent area of the
bract. (202) Floral bracts ovate <to oblanceolate>. (204) Floral bracts
falling early <occasionally>, or not falling early. (205) Floral bracts 3.5-4
mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1-1.8 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous.
(252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers
1.3-1.7 mm long. (311) Styles slender, not extending beyond the beak. (313)
Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a
perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia sub-lanceolate. (339)
Perigynia 4-5 mm long. (340) Perigynia 0.9-1.3 mm wide. (341) Perigynia
sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or ascending. (343) Perigynia black <at apex>,
or straw-coloured <or greenish towards the base>. (344) Perigynia membranous.
(345) Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia scabrous <along the margins>.
(348) Perigynia appearing nerveless. (351) Perigynia with 2 keels. (352)
Perigynia apex beaked with a long beak. (353) Perigynia apex deeply bidentate.
(354) Achenes not filling the upper part of the perigynia. (355) Achenes
triangular. (360) 2n = 40. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or high arctic.
(366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Axel Heiberg, and Parry Islands <Bathurst,
Melville>, or Cornwallis, Banks, Victoria, King William, Southampton, and
Coats <as well as Air Force, Prince Charles, Digges, and Winter Islands>.
(373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Hummocks <moderately to imperfectly
drained>. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or dry. (376) Substrate
calcareous. (377) Substrate rock, or gravel, or sand, or silt, or clay, or
till <in combinations of the above>. (378) Substrate with high organic
content, or peat <occasionally>. (379) Wet meadows <sometimes at the margins>,
or hummocks, or around the margins of ponds <and peat bogs>, or river terraces
<typically older and dry>, or tundra, or slopes <sometimes below snow banks>,
or cliffs <rocky ledges and slopes>, or sea shore <wet swails and the slopes
of beach ridges>. (380) Often found in dry, rocky or turfy areas on plains and
slopes; common associates on dry tundra include Dryas, Cassiope, Saxifraga
oppositifolia, and Carex rupestris. Also found, in damper places particularly
of lower beach plains. (428) Porsild mapped a single record on Prince Patrick
Island that we have not traced. (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex,
Tristimatae. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycams.


Carex glacialis <Mackenzie>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Petreae (O.F. Lang) Kükenthal.
(8) No synonymy in Kartesz (1994). (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants less
than 15 cm high <usually>, or more than 15 cm high <continental North
America>. (11) Plants (3.5-)5-15(-30) cm high. (15) Plants tufted <densely>.
(20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with short horizontal stems, or without
easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems erect
<sub-erect>. (33) Stems about as high as the leaves, or conspicuously taller
than the leaves. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems
glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths tapering into the blade. (69)
Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the
base of the plant. (71) Sheaths brown, or reddish. (75) Ligules present. (83)
Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves (3-)6-10 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-1 mm wide.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight <when fresh>, or somewhat
curled <older leaves>. (105) Leaf blades glabrous, or hairy <towards the tip>.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat, or folded, or
caniculate <strongly keeled>. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence much reduced, or
scale-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence shorter than the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 0.1-1 cm long. (142)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath
shorter than the blade, or sheathless. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate.
(152) Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 3-4 spikes. (154)
Inflorescence oblong, or lanceolate. (156) Individual spike(s) erect <with few
flowers; all spikes unisexual>. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes sessile <or
almost so>. (160) Inflorescence 0.6-1.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 1.5-4 mm
wide. (168) Terminal spike wholly staminate. (197) Staminate flowers
conspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral
bracts brown. (200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler
in colour than the adjacent area of the bract. (202) Floral bracts obtuse
<broadly ovate>. (205) Floral bracts 1.5-2 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 2-2.4
mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals
absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1.3-1.5 mm long. (311) Styles
slender, extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (316)
Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an
achene. (338) Perigynia broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 1.5-2.5 mm long. (340)
Perigynia 0.9-1.2 mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or
ascending. (343) Perigynia brown <in bands>, or green. (344) Perigynia
membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous <scabrous
toward the apex>. (348) Perigynia appearing nerveless. (351) Perigynia with 2
keels <that are not prominent>. (352) Perigynia apex beaked with a short beak.
(354) Achenes filling the perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular. (360) 2n = 34.
(364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Uncommon. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Beekman Peninsula,
Isortoq Fiord, Dorset Island, Iqaluit, and Kimmirut>, or Ellesmere <Lake
Hazen>, or Axel Heiberg <Iceberg Glacier>, or Victoria <Prince Albert Sound>,
or Southampton <Duke of York Bay>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374)
Rocky sites <also sandy and or gravelly places on dry slopes, cliff pockets
and ridges>. (375) Substrate dry <rarely in wet places>. (376) Substrate
calcareous. (377) Substrate rock, or gravel, or sand. (378) Substrate with low
organic content. (379) Slopes, or ridges, or cliffs <on ledges>. (380) Can be
the dominant species on dry gravel ridges. Typically found in cliff pockets
with Carex nardina or in sandy cracks in bedrock. (385) Porsild 1957. (428)
Porsild collected a specimen from Iqaluit (CAN 259418) found in the littoral
zone in a sheltered bog but a change in the collection number on the herbarium
sheet suggests that the habitat information may not be correct. (430) Section
used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex, Tristigmatae. (431) Code used for graphics
files: cycagc.


Carex glareosa <Wahlenb.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Vignea, sect. Glareosae G. Don. (4) Kungl.
Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl. nov. ser., 24: 146. 1803. (8) Carex glareosa var.
amphigena Fern., including C. marina auct. non Dewey Carex amphigena (Fern.)
Mackenzie Carex bipartita All. var. amphigena (Fern.) Polunin Carex bipartita
var. glareosa (Schkuhr ex Wahlenb.) Polunin Carex glareosa subsp. marina sensu
Löve and Löve. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high
<usually>. (11) Plants (8-)12-25(-30) cm high. (15) Plants tufted. (20) Roots
pallid-brown. (21) Plants without easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem
scales present <not conspicuous>. (32) Stems somewhat curving <slender,
flexuous>. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems
filiform <0.5-1 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems triangular in cross section. (36)
Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths tapering into the blade.
(69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at
the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths brown, or reddish <or straw coloured>.
(75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.1-0.2 mm long. (83) Leaves mostly basal.
(89) Leaves 5-15 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-2(-2.5) mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (103) Leaf blades stomata on both upper and
lower surfaces. (105) Leaf blades glabrous, or hairy <glaucous, gray-green>.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat, or strongly
keeled, or caniculate. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence present, or absent.
(139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence much
reduced, or scale-like <sometimes similar to a floral bract>. (140) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence shorter than the apex
of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence 0.25-1 cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence with sheath shorter than the blade. (143) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence persistent. (151)
Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence
2-3(-4) spikes <close together, brown, usually overlapping>. (154)
Inflorescence linear, or ovate. (156) Individual spike(s) ascending, or
divergent. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes sessile <entirely female>. (160)
Inflorescence (0.8-)1-2(-2.3) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-10 mm wide. (168)
Terminal spike staminate at the base <club-shaped, or oblong>. (197) Staminate
flowers inconspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium
<usually>. (199) Floral bracts brown, or pale grey. (200) Floral bracts with
margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent area of the
bract. (202) Floral bracts ovate. (205) Floral bracts 2.3-2.7 mm long. (206)
Floral bracts 1.2-1.6 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth
absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1.8-2.2 mm
long. (311) Styles slender, not extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per
style 2. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium.
(325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia broadly ovate <to fusiform>. (339)
Perigynia 2.3-3(-3.5) mm long. (340) Perigynia 1.2-1.6 mm wide. (341)
Perigynia sessile <or almost sessile>. (342) Perigynia erect or ascending.
(343) Perigynia straw-coloured <grayish, greenish or reddish brown>. (344)
Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous.
(348) Perigynia strongly nerved <adaxial surface>. (352) Perigynia apex beaked
with a short beak. (353) Perigynia apex not bidentate. (354) Achenes filling
the perigynia. (355) Achenes triangular <slightly>. (360) 2n = 66. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic. (367) Uncommon. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin
<Inugsuin Fiord, Beekman Peninsula, Isortoq River, Clyde Inlet, Pangnirtung,
Iqaluit, and Kimmirut>, or Devon <Dundas Harbour>, or Coats <Cairne Cove>.
(374) Moist areas <a seashore plant that forms dense, compact, flat tussocks
on sand and clay beaches subject to spring flooding. Often the dominant
species around the nesting grounds of sea birds>. (375) Substrate imperfectly
drained. (376) Substrate halophytic. (377) Substrate rock, or gravel, or clay.
(379) Sea shore <on flats just above the strand line>, or ridges <and rocky
ledges near the sea>. (380) Typically situated between Puccinellia phryganodes
meadows and tundra by the sea. Common around bays and lagoons and often the
dominant species around the nesting grounds of sea birds. (384) Porsild (1957)
recognized C. glareosa var. amphigena Fern., as did Halliday and Chater
(1969), but this is no longer consider a recognisable entity (P. Ball,
personal communication, 1998). Halliday and Charter (1969a) examined fruit
shape in the circumpolar C. glareosa complex and concluded there is continuous
variation between the long, fusiform fruits of C. glareosa and the broad
fruits of plants which are referred either to C. marina Dewey or C. glareosa
var. amphigena Fern. Halliday and Chater (1969a) indicated that the species C.
glareosa and C. lachenalii Schkuhr are fairly closely related. Carex
lachenalii is a species of freshwater mires and snowpatches, but in east
Greenland it occurs not infrequently by the seashore where poorly developed
individuals may very closely resemble C. glareosa. By contrast, C. glareosa is
nearly always maritime growing in the Arctic with C. subspathacea, C. ursina,
Puccinellia phyrganodes and Stellaria humifusa. Halliday and Chater (1969)
gave the following characters for separating C. glareosa from C. lachenalii:
C. glareosa plants have leaves with stomata on both surfaces, C. lachenalii
plants have stomata on the lower surface only. In C. glareosa the lateral
spikes are entirely pistillate, in C. lachenalii they have staminate flowers
at the base. The fruits of C. glareosa are seldom distinctly beaked,
concolorus and they may vary from brown to pale, whitish green; the fruits of
C. lachenalii are distintly beaked, dark brown and often tinged with green
Porsild (1957) mapped records from Victoria and Ellesmere Islands, but these
have not been confirmed. (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Vignea. (431)
Code used for graphics files: cycagr.


Carex gynocrates <Wormsk. ex Drej.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Vignea, sect. Physoglochin Dumortier. (8)
Carex dioica L. subsp. gynocrates (Wormsk. ex Drej.) Hultén Carex dioica L.
var. gynocrates (Wormsk. ex Drej.) Ostenf. Carex parallela auct. non
(Laestad.) Sommerf. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high.
(11) Plants 4-15 cm high. (15) Plants tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21)
Plants with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants stoloniferous. (28) Stem
scales absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems about as high as the leaves
<usually>, or conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems filiform
<0.5-0.8 mm in diameter. Porsild, 1957>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths not forming
a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown,
or green. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 4-8(-14)
cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-2 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades
straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel.
(126) Leaf blades flat, or bristle-like <Porsild, 1957>, or involute <loosely
so; narrow leaves have a relatively distinct cross section>. (135) Flowering
stems without leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence absent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence a
single spike <either staminate and linear, pistillate and cylindric, or
staminate above and pistillate beneath>. (156) Individual spike(s) erect.
(160) Inflorescence 0.4-1.3 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 1.5-7 mm wide
<staminate spikes 1.5-2 mm; pistillate spikes 3-7 mm>. (168) Terminal spike
wholly staminate, or staminate at the apex. (197) Staminate flowers
conspicuous <when present as a completely staminate spike>. (198) Floral
bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts orange brown. (200)
Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the
adjacent area of the bract <translucent>. (202) Floral bracts ovate. (205)
Floral bracts 2-2.5 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.3-1.7 mm wide. (207) Floral
bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals
absent. (285) Anthers 2.3-2.7 mm long. (311) Styles slender, extending beyond
the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 2. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit
surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia broadly
ovate. (339) Perigynia 2.5-2.9 mm long. (340) Perigynia 1.3-1.7 mm wide. (341)
Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia spreading at maturity. (343) Perigynia
golden brown. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface glossy.
(346) Perigynia glabrous. (348) Perigynia strongly nerved. (352) Perigynia
apex beaked with a short beak. (353) Perigynia apex oblique, becoming slightly
bidentate. (354) Achenes filling the perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular.
(360) 2n = 48 and 50. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin
<Kimmirut, Isortoq River>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Moist areas
<in wet mosses>. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained. (376) Substrate
calcareous. (378) Substrate with high organic content, or peat. (379) Wet
meadows <in springy places with Sphagnum>. (384) Porsild (1957) mapped one
record from Kimmirut. Since then a collection from Isortoq River (69° 56'N,
76° 50'W) is a significant range extension, suggesting the species should be
looked for at other locations on Baffin Island. (385) Porsild 1957. (428) No
habitat notes available, besides Porsild. (430) Section used by Porsild
(1957): Primocarex. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycagy.


Carex holostoma <Drej.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Atratae Christ. (8) No synonymy
in Kartesz (1994). (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high
<usually>. (11) Plants (10-)15-20(-30) cm high. (15) Plants single-stemmed, or
tufted <loosely>. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with conspicuously long
horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous. (28) Stem scales
present <on stolons>. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than
the leaves <usually>. (34) Stems not filiform <0.8-1.5 mm in diameter, rather
stout. Porsild, 1957>. (35) Stems triangular in cross section. (36) Stems
glabrous <mostly, but minutely scaberulous on ridges>. (57) Petioles absent.
(68) Sheaths tapering into the blade. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths
not forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths
brown, or reddish <sometimes purplish basal sheaths>. (75) Ligules present.
(83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 4-12 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-3(-4) mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous <but minutely scaberulous on midvein and margins>. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat, or revolute <slightly>. (135)
Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence conspicuous and leaf-like, or much reduced, or
scale-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence extending beyond the inflorescence <rarely>, or similar in
length to the inflorescence, or shorter than the apex of the inflorescence.
(141) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 0.5-3.5
cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
with sheath shorter than the blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence persistent <but withering to become
inconspicuous>. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate
<very compact>. (153) Inflorescence 2-3 spikes. (156) Individual spike(s)
ascending. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes sessile, or lateral spikes borne
on pedicels. (158) Pedicels smooth <short, so that the inflorescence is
head-like>. (160) Inflorescence 1-2.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 8-12 mm
wide. (168) Terminal spike wholly staminate. (197) Staminate flowers
inconspicuous <small, the spike often concealed between the pistillate
spikes>. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium, or as long as the
gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts brown, or black. (200) Floral bracts with
margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent area of the
bract <the transparent marginal zone very narrow>. (202) Floral bracts ovate.
(205) Floral bracts 1.5-2 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1-1.5 mm wide. (207)
Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265)
Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1.5-2 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and short.
(313) Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by
a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia obovate. (339) Perigynia
1.8-2(-2.5) mm long. (340) Perigynia 1-1.2 mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile.
(342) Perigynia erect or ascending. (343) Perigynia brown, or green. (344)
Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous.
(347) Perigynia papillose. (348) Perigynia appearing nerveless. (352)
Perigynia apex merely conical. (354) Achenes filling the perigynia. (355)
Achenes triangular. (360) 2n = 54-60. (364) North American <also known from
central W. Greenland, North Iceland and from isolated stations in northernmost
Scandinavia and E. Asia. Absent in E. Greenland>. (365) Low arctic. (367)
Uncommon. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Beekman Peninsula, Lake Harbour, and
Ogac Lake, Iqaluit>, or Southampton <Coral Harbour>, or Victoria <Surrey Lake;
a new collection (CAN 526808) since Porsild (1957) which extends the range
considerably. The specimen was annotated as this name by T. Spribille, 1997>.
(373) Substrate type: acidic <the species is an indicator of acidic sites>.
(374) Hummocks <turfy places in the tundra and by the edge of small ponds>.
(375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes. (376) Substrate
acidic <a pronounced acidophyte (Porsild, 1957) although it has also been
reported from a calcareous fen, CAN 259414>. (379) Hummocks, or around the
margins of ponds, or river terraces. (385) Recognized by Porsild (1957). (430)
Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex, Tristagmatae. (431) Code used for
graphics files: cycaho.


Carex lachenalii <Schkuhr>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Glareosae G. Don. (4) Beschr.
Abbild. Riedgr. 51. 1801. (8) Carex bipartita All. Carex lagopina Wahlenb.
Carex tripartita auct. non All. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants less than
15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants (8-)10-25(-50) cm high. (15)
Plants forming loose clusters, or tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants
with short horizontal stems, or without easily seen horizontal stems. (28)
Stem scales present <often inconspicuous>. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems
conspicuously taller than the leaves. (35) Stems triangular in cross section
<sometimes with heavy sclerenchyma strands on the angles>. (36) Stems glabrous
<at 10X, minutely scaberulous at the apex, seen at 40X>. (57) Petioles absent.
(68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths persisting <the
first year>. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the base of
the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or brown. (75) Ligules present. (76)
Ligules 0.1-0.2 mm long. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 5-18 cm long.
(90) Leaves 0.5-2.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades
straight. (103) Leaf blades stomata only on lower surface. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous, or scabrous <scaberulous>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface
glabrous, or scabrous <on margins and midvein>. (119) Leaf blade venation
parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat, or revolute <loosely; not strongly keeled>.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves, or without leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence much reduced, or scale-like.
(140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence shorter
than the apex of the inflorescence <usually, often inconspicuous>. (141) Leaf
or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 0.4-1 cm long.
(142) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence with
sheath shorter than the blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152)
Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 3-4 spikes. (154)
Inflorescence linear, or ovate. (156) Individual spike(s) erect, or ascending
<the lowermost somewhat distant>. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes sessile
<or almost so; all lateral spikes pistillate above and staminate below>. (160)
Inflorescence (0.5-)1-2.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-15 mm wide. (168)
Terminal spike staminate at the base. (197) Staminate flowers inconspicuous.
(198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts orange
brown <reddish>. (200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein
paler in colour than the adjacent area of the bract <margins narrow and
scarious>. (202) Floral bracts ovate. (205) Floral bracts 2.3-2.6 mm long.
(206) Floral bracts 1.6-2.2 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252)
Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers
1.2-1.6 mm long. (311) Styles slender, extending beyond the beak. (313)
Stigmas per style 2. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a
perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia sub-lanceolate <to ovate>.
(339) Perigynia (1.5-)2.5-3(-3.8) mm long. (340) Perigynia 1.2-1.4 mm wide.
(341) Perigynia borne on a stalk. (342) Perigynia erect or ascending. (343)
Perigynia straw-coloured <towards the base>, or golden brown <towards the
apex>. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346)
Perigynia glabrous, or scabrous <with a scaberulous margin towards the beak>.
(348) Perigynia faintly nerved. (351) Perigynia with 2 keels. (352) Perigynia
apex beaked with a long beak <0.75-1 mm long>. (353) Perigynia apex oblique,
becoming slightly bidentate. (354) Achenes filling the perigynia. (355)
Achenes lenticular. (360) 2n = 58. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic <a
subarctic, boreal species>. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Uncommon <low arctic, boreal, barely entering the archipelago>.
(371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Southampton <as well as Melville Peninsula
and Igloolik Island>. (374) Moist areas <in wet sand or gravel by brooks and
lakeshores. Not littoral>. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained. (376)
Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate rock, or gravel, or silt, or clay, or
till. (379) Along streams <can be found on the slopes of muddy ravines>, or
lake shores <on beach ridges and Salix rafts>, or tundra <and grassy meadows>,
or slopes. (380) Not a littoral species (Porsild, 1957). (385) Treated as
Carex lachenalii Schkuhr, Porsild (1957), as Carex bipartita All. Kartesz
(1994). Typification is questionable; Toivoner in FNA treatment gives the
taxon half-hearted support. P. Ball personal communication. Halliday and
Chater (1969) gave the following characters for separating C. glareosa from C.
lachenalii: C. glareosa plants have leaves with stomata on both surfaces, C.
lachenalii plants have leaves with stomata on the lower surface only. In C.
glareosa the lateral spikes are entirely pistillate, in C. glareosa they have
staminate flowers at the base. The fruits of C. glareosa are seldom distinctly
beaked, concolorus and they may vary from brown to pale, whitish green; the
fruits of C. lachenalii are distintly beaked, dark brown and often tinged with
green. (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Vignea. (431) Code used for
graphics files: cycala.


Carex lugens <Holm>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (8) No synonymy in Kartesz (1994). (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (385) Porsild (1957) = Carex bigelowii subsp.
lugens. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Not accepted in this study.
(431) Code used for graphics files: cycalg.


Carex macloviana <d’Urv.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Vignea, section Ovlaes Kunth. (8) Two
subspecies recognized in Kartesz (1994). (119) Leaf blade venation parallel.
(364) Not circumpolar, amphi-Atlantic, amphi-Beringian, or North American
<subarctic-alpine, east and west North America and Greenland, Eurasia and S.
America (Porsild 1957). Not yet reported for the Arctic Archipelago>. (374)
Wet meadows, or moist areas <grassy south facing slopes>. (384)
Subarctic-alpine, east and west North America and Greenland, Eurasia and S.
America (Porsild 1957). Not yet reported for the Arctic Archipelago. (385)
Porsild (1957), mentioned this taxon under the description of C. chordorrhiza
as having a sub-arctic-alpine distribution. It has not yet been reported on
the Arctic Archipelago, but it is in Greenland. It has a very scattered,
disjunct distribution in the east. P. Ball personal communication. No
specimens from the Arctic Isalnds at CAN (1998). (424) Morphological data not
coded. (426) Not accepted in this study. (431) Code used for graphics files:
cycamc.


Carex marina subsp. marina <Dewey>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Vignea section Glareosae G. Don. (4) Amer. J.
Sci. 29: 247. 1836. (8) C. amblyorhyncha Krecz. (9) Plants monoecious. (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high <usually>, or more than 15 cm high <rarely>. (11)
Plants 10-15(-30) cm high. (15) Plants tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21)
Plants with short horizontal stems, or without easily seen horizontal stems.
(28) Stem scales present. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves.
(34) Stems filiform <0.3-0.6 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems triangular in cross
section <with heavy sclerenchyma on the angles>. (36) Stems glabrous <at 10X,
scaberulous at apex seen at 40X>. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths tapering
into the blade. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths not forming a
conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or
brown. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.1-0.2 mm long. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems <in the lower half>. (89) Leaves 5-10 cm long.
(90) Leaves 0.8-1.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades
straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous, or scabrous <scaberulous>. (112) Leaf
blades abaxial surface glabrous, or scabrous <on margins and midvein>. (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat, or revolute <loosely>.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence much reduced, or scale-like. (140) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence shorter than the apex
of the inflorescence <often inconspicuous>. (141) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence 0.4-1.3 cm long. (142) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath shorter
than the blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence
multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 2-3 spikes. (154) Inflorescence linear, or
oblong. (156) Individual spike(s) erect, or ascending. (157) Inflorescence
lateral spikes sessile <or almost so; all spikes staminate below and
pistillate above>. (160) Inflorescence 1-1.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 3-8
mm wide. (168) Terminal spike staminate at the base <oblong-clavate>. (197)
Staminate flowers inconspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the
gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts orange brown. (200) Floral bracts with margins,
and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent area of the bract
<margins relatively wide>. (202) Floral bracts ovate. (205) Floral bracts 2-3
mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.8-2.2 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous.
(252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers
0.8-1 mm long <<limited sample>>. (311) Styles slender, extending beyond the
beak. (313) Stigmas per style 2. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit
surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia elliptic.
(339) Perigynia 2.5-3 mm long. (340) Perigynia 1.1-1.3 mm wide. (341)
Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or ascending. (343) Perigynia
straw-coloured <towards the base>, or golden brown <towards the apex>. (344)
Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous.
(347) Perigynia papillose. (348) Perigynia faintly nerved. (351) Perigynia
with 2 keels <slight>. (352) Perigynia apex merely conical. (353) Perigynia
apex oblique, becoming slightly bidentate. (354) Achenes filling the
perigynia. (360) 2n = 58, 60, 62, and 64. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands:
Ellesmere <Lake Hazen, Borup Fiord, and Hot Weather Creek>. (375) Substrate
aquatic, or imperfectly drained. (377) Substrate sand, or moss. (378)
Substrate with high organic content. (379) Wet meadows, or marshes <in
extensive stands of Carex aquatilis var. stans>, or lake shores <on the lower
slopes or in mossy marshy areas>. (385) Carex marina sensu Mackenzie is C.
glareosa Wahlenb. Porsild (1957) treated this taxon as Carex amblyorhyncha
Krecz. Halliday and Chater (1969c) documented that C. marina is the earlier
name of this taxon. Carex marina was described by Dewey (1836) from material
collected in the Canadian Arctic by Richarson, probably on the second of
Franklin’s expeditions. Fernald (1902), like Kükenthal (1909), considered
Dewey’s plant to be C. heleonastes. Halliday and Chater (1969c) showed that C.
marina is to be applied to the plant commonly known as C. amblyorhyncha.
Halliday and Chater (1969a) suggested that in the past the widespread C.
marina hybridized with the more local C. glareosa until the latter no longer
occurs in pure populations One of the specimens mapped from Ellesmere Island
was annotated as this taxon by H. Toivorer (1991). One other specimen from
Ellesmere Island was found at CAN in 1998. (431) Code used for graphics files:
cycamr.


Carex maritima <Gunn.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Vignea, sect. Foetidae (L.H. Bailey)
Kükenthal. (8) Carex incurva Lightf. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants less
than 15 cm high <rarely etiolated and taller>. (11) Plants (2-)5-10(-20) cm
high. (15) Plants tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous. (28) Stem scales present <on horizontal
stems>. (32) Stems erect, or decumbent <usually>. (33) Stems shorter than the
leaves, or about as high as the leaves, or conspicuously taller than the
leaves. (34) Stems not filiform <0.6-4.0 mm in diameter including sheathing
leaf bases>. (35) Stems triangular in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57)
Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths tapering into the blade. (69) Sheaths
persisting. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the
plant. (71) Sheaths brown <pallid>. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly
basal. (89) Leaves (2-)3-8(-13) cm long. (90) Leaves 0.25-2(-2.6) mm wide.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades somewhat curled. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous, or hairy <leaf tips scabrid>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel.
(126) Leaf blades flat, or folded <sometimes loosely so>. (135) Flowering
stems without leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence absent. (151) Inflorescence spicate, or head-like. (152)
Inflorescence a single spike <in appearance>, or multispicate <composed of
tightly aggregated spikes>. (153) Inflorescence 2-5 spikes. (154)
Inflorescence globose or subglobose. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (157)
Inflorescence lateral spikes sessile. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-1.4 cm long.
(161) Inflorescence 4.5-9 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike staminate at the apex.
(197) Staminate flowers inconspicuous <3-5 flowers at top of each spike>.
(198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium <apex mucronate>. (199) Floral
bracts brown. (200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler
in colour than the adjacent area of the bract <margins translucent, the
surface between brown>. (202) Floral bracts ovate, or obtuse. (205) Floral
bracts 2.5-3 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.6-2 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts
glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent.
(285) Anthers 1.2-1.5 mm long. (311) Styles slender, not extending beyond the
beak. (313) Stigmas per style 2. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit
surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia broadly
ovate. (339) Perigynia 3-4.5 mm long. (340) Perigynia 1.5-2 mm wide. (341)
Perigynia borne on a stalk <<not illustrated in Porsild (1957)>>. (342)
Perigynia erect or ascending <but divergent at maturity>. (343) Perigynia
straw-coloured, or brown. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface
dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous, or hairy <scabrous near the neck>. (348)
Perigynia appearing nerveless. (349) Perigynia inflated <somewhat>. (352)
Perigynia apex beaked with a long beak <about 0.5 mm long>. (353) Perigynia
apex deeply bidentate <scabrous near the neck of the pergynia>. (354) Achenes
not filling the upper part of the perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular. (360)
2n = 60. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Coastal. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Axel
Heiberg, Banks, and Victoria. (374) Hummocks, or rocky sites <Common in wet
gravelly places by brooks. Observed to grow up to 2000 feet or more above sea
level (Porsild specimen label CAN 223325). Plants often on wet flats just
above high strand line where they may form large mats. This is a littoral
species that is generally confined to sandy, gravelly, or turfy places along
the coast, but in the Western Arctic (Alaska, Yukon, Mackenzie, and the
Western Arctic Archipelago) not infrequently growing some distance inland and
at considerable elevation above sealevel (Porsild, 1957)>. (375) Substrate
imperfectly drained, or dry. (376) Substrate calcareous, or halophytic. (377)
Substrate gravel, or sand, or silt <sometimes salt encrusted>, or clay. (379)
Around the margins of ponds, or marshes, or along streams <sometimes on mossy
banks>, or river terraces <often near the mouth of a river in halophytic
communities>, or tundra <marshy>, or sea shore <estuaries and lagoons, wet
flats, sandy or gravelly beaches>. (380) Commonly a littoral species of wet
places, although it has been noted to grow up to 2000 feet or more (Porsild
specimen label CAN 223325), often in calcareous well drained areas. Near the
sea, it often forms dense mats in wet, flooded beaches. (385) Porsild (1957)
suggested that inland specimens of C.langeana Fern. may be referable to this
species. The later is distinguished from C. maritima by its
ellipsoid-cylindric head, short anthers, and scabrous-tipped leaves. Specimens
of C. maritima may have scaberulous leaf tips. (430) Section used by Porsild
(1957): Vignea. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycamt.


Carex membranacea <Hook.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Vesicariae Carey. (4) Hooker in
Lyon, An attempt to reach Repulse Bay. 195. 1825. (6) Type: Canada, N.W.T.,
Southampton Island, 1821-1823, W.E. Parry. Holotype: K. (8) Carex
membranopacta L. Bailey Carex physochlaena Holm Carex physochlaena Holm. For
more detailed and complete synonymy see Ford and Ball (1992). (9) Plants
monoecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high <usually>. (11) Plants
(10-)15-40(-55) cm high. (15) Plants forming loose clusters. (20) Roots
yellow, or pallid-brown. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems.
(22) Plants rhizomatous <stout and scaly>. (28) Stem scales present. (32)
Stems erect. (33) Stems about as high as the leaves, or conspicuously taller
than the leaves <usually>. (34) Stems not filiform <robust 0.5-1.2(-2.1) mm in
diameter, above the uppermost leaf>. (35) Stems triangular in cross section
<obtusely>. (36) Stems scabrous <below the inflorescence>. (57) Petioles
absent. (68) Sheaths tapering into the blade <tightly enveloping the stem;
hyaline ventrally; mouth truncate or concave>. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70)
Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant <usually>.
(71) Sheaths brown, or reddish. (75) Ligules present <0.4-3.1(-4.2) mm long,
shorter than wide, obtuse at the apex>. (83) Leaves mostly basal <6-12 per
stem>. (89) Leaves 5-15(-32) cm long. (90) Leaves (1-)2.5-5(-6.2) mm wide
<keeled>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades somewhat curled. (105)
Leaf blades glabrous, or hairy <minutely scaberulous on margins and midvein>.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat, or revolute <at
the margins>, or folded <loosely>. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence present. (139)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence conspicuous
and leaf-like <very variable>. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence extending beyond the inflorescence, or similar in
length to the inflorescence, or shorter than the apex of the inflorescence.
(141) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
(0.5-)1.5-16(-19) cm long <0.2-3.6(-4.8) mm wide>. (142) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence sheathless. (143) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence persistent. (151)
Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence
3-5(-6) spikes. (154) Inflorescence oblong <each 1-4.5 cm long>. (156)
Individual spike(s) ascending. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes borne on
pedicels. (158) Pedicels smooth <or minutely scaberulous, 1-20(-42) mm long>.
(160) Inflorescence 2.5-10(-13) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 15-30 mm wide.
(168) Terminal spike wholly staminate <9-29 mm long, 1.8-5.2 mm wide;
sometimes 1-3 staminate spikes present>. (197) Staminate flowers conspicuous.
(198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium, or as long as the gynoecium.
(199) Floral bracts black <purplish>, or brown. (200) Floral bracts with
margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent area of the
bract. (202) Floral bracts ovate. (205) Floral bracts 2.2-4.5(-5.5) mm long.
(206) Floral bracts 1-1.7(-3) mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252)
Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers
2.1-3.2 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per style 3.
(316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit
an achene. (338) Perigynia elliptic <abruptly contracted into a beak at the
apex>. (339) Perigynia (2.2-)2.5-3(-4.1) mm long. (340) Perigynia 1.3-2.2 mm
wide. (341) Perigynia borne on a stalk <0.2-0.9 mm long>. (342) Perigynia
reflexed, or spreading at maturity <crowded, forming angles 80-110° with the
spike axis>. (343) Perigynia black, or brown. (344) Perigynia membranous.
(345) Perigynia surface glossy. (346) Perigynia glabrous. (347) Perigynia
tuberculate <slightly>. (348) Perigynia faintly nerved. (349) Perigynia
inflated <slightly>. (352) Perigynia apex beaked with a short beak <0.2-0.8 mm
long>. (353) Perigynia apex oblique, becoming slightly bidentate <with teeth
to 0.3 mm long>. (354) Achenes not filling the upper part of the perigynia.
(355) Achenes triangular. (360) 2n = 74 <76-80>. (364) North American <and
East Asia, but not Greenland>. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Victoria, Prince
of Wales, and King William. (374) Hummocks <and flood plains>. (385) Ford and
Ball (1992) noted that this species is the most restricted of all the
short-beaked taxa, in section Vesicariae being confined primarily to the North
American Arctic. Is is notiiceably absent from Greenland and occurs in Eurasia
only in the Chukot Peninsula and Koryakskiy Mountain region of extreme eastern
Russia. It is one of the few truly northern species of sedge, being widespread
in the Arctic Archipelago and south as far as northern British Columbia, the
southern boundary of the Northwest Territories and northern Quebec. Although
this species is said to occur in the Churchill, Manitoba region Porsild and
Cody (1980) no specimen has been found to support suggestion. Carex membrancea
frequently occurs as a dominant in a wide variety of open, moist habitats that
often have a well-developed peat layer. It does not appear to grow in standing
water or in shoreline communities. (430) Section used by Porsild (1957):
Carex, Tristigmatae. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycame.


Carex microglochin <Wahlenb.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Leucoglochin Dumortier. (8) No
synonymy in Kartesz (1994). (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants less than 15 cm
high <in Arctic Islands>. (11) Plants 4-15 cm high <-35 cm further south>.
(15) Plants single-stemmed, or forming loose clusters. (20) Roots
pallid-brown. (21) Plants with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants
stoloniferous. (28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems
conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems filiform <0.5-0.7 mm in
diameter. Porsild, 1957>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36)
Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into
the blades. (69) Sheaths breaking down into fibres <slowly>. (70) Sheaths not
forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths brown,
or reddish. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 1-6 cm
long. (90) Leaves 0.4-1 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades
straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel.
(126) Leaf blades involute <to semi-circular>. (135) Flowering stems without
leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
absent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence a single spike <few
flowered>. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160) Inflorescence 1-1.5 cm long.
(161) Inflorescence 5-10 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike staminate at the apex.
(197) Staminate flowers conspicuous <as a small tuft>. (198) Floral bracts
shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts orange brown. (200) Floral
bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent
area of the bract. (201) Floral bracts reflexed. (202) Floral bracts ovate.
(204) Floral bracts falling early. (205) Floral bracts 2.8-3.2 mm long. (206)
Floral bracts 1.8-2.2 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth
absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1.8-2.2 mm
long. (311) Styles slender, not extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per
style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium.
(325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia sub-lanceolate <subulate>. (339)
Perigynia 5-6 mm long. (340) Perigynia 0.5-0.8 mm wide. (341) Perigynia
sessile. (342) Perigynia reflexed. (343) Perigynia straw-coloured, or golden
brown. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346)
Perigynia glabrous. (348) Perigynia faintly nerved. (352) Perigynia apex
beaked with a long beak <from which a stiff, bristle-like rachilla projects
beyond the stigmas>. (354) Achenes not filling the upper part of the
perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular. (360) 2n = 48, 56, and 58. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Victoria <Porsild (1957) mapped one
occurance in Forbisher Bay on Baffin Island for which there is no CAN
specimen>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Wet meadows, or moist
areas. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes. (376)
Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate sand, or silt, or till <on talus
slopes>. (379) River terraces <and deltas>, or slopes, or around the margins
of ponds. (380) Found in springy areas and on wet sand along rivers. (384)
Since Posild 1957, one specimen (CAN 485156) was collected at Holman resulting
in a considerable range extension. (385) Porsild 1957. (430) Section used by
Porsild (1957): Primocarex. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycamg.


Carex nardina <Fr.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Nardinae Kükenthal. (8) Carex nardina var.
atriceps Kükenthal. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high
<dwarfed in exposed habitats>, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants (5-)10-30
cm high. (15) Plants tufted <sometimes dead in the centre of the tussock>.
(20) Roots red-brown. (21) Plants without easily seen horizontal stems. (28)
Stem scales present. (32) Stems erect, or decumbent. (33) Stems shorter than
the leaves, or about as high as the leaves, or conspicuously taller than the
leaves. (34) Stems filiform <0.3-0.5 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems circular or
oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths
tapering into the blade. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths forming a
conspicuous build up at the base of the plant <as hard compact tufts>. (71)
Sheaths greyish brown, or brown. (75) Ligules present <slight>. (83) Leaves
mostly basal. (89) Leaves (5-)10-15(-20) cm long. (90) Leaves 0.2-0.3 mm wide
<filiform>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf
blades hairy <or scaberlous, with rows of stiff trichomes>. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades triangular in cross section <or merely
angular>. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence absent. (151) Inflorescence spicate,
or head-like. (152) Inflorescence a single spike. (154) Inflorescence globose
or subglobose. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-1.2 cm
long. (161) Inflorescence 3-6 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike staminate at the
apex. (197) Staminate flowers inconspicuous <except at anthesis>. (198) Floral
bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts brown, or orange brown.
(200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than
the adjacent area of the bract. (202) Floral bracts obtuse. (205) Floral
bracts 3-4 mm long. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254)
Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1.5-2 mm long. (311) Styles
slender, not extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 2. (316)
Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an
achene. (338) Perigynia broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 3.3-3.7 mm long. (340)
Perigynia 1.4-1.7 mm wide. (341) Perigynia borne on a stalk. (342) Perigynia
erect or ascending. (343) Perigynia whitish, or straw-coloured, or brown
<towards the apex>. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull.
(346) Perigynia glabrous <but slightly scabrous at the apex>. (348) Perigynia
appearing nerveless. (351) Perigynia with 2 keels <scaberulous on the keels>.
(352) Perigynia apex beaked with a short beak. (353) Perigynia apex oblique,
becoming slightly bidentate. (354) Achenes not filling the upper part of the
perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular. (360) 2n = 66 and 70. (364)
Amphi-Atlantic <Porsild 1957>. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Axel
Heiberg, and Banks <a collection at Sachs Harbour comprises a range extension
since Porsild, 1957>, or Victoria, Southampton, and Coats <as well as Air
Force Island>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Rocky sites <dry sand,
gravel or rocky slopes>. (375) Substrate dry. (376) Substrate calcareous.
(377) Substrate rock, or gravel, or sand, or silt, or till. (378) Substrate
with low organic content. (379) Lake shores <on raised sandy beach ridges>, or
slopes <often dry and gravelly talus>, or cliffs <rocky outcrops, dry sandy
shelves, or turfy ledges>. (380) Can be found on the edges of Dryas mounds in
dry habitats. Typical geologic features of the habitat are moraines and kames.
(381) Plant height in this species is indicative of the harshness of the
environment in which plants grow. (385) Porsild (1957) indicated that the
species was represented in the Canadian Arctic by the eastern race, var.
atriceps Kükenthal and distinguished from var. nardina by its taller growth
and less curved culms and leaves This is no longer considered to be a
recognisable entity (P. Ball, University of Toronto, personal communication
1997). (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Primocarex. (431) Code used for
graphics files: cycana.


Carex norvegica <Retz> subsp. inserrulata <Kalela>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Atratae. (8) Carex halleri Gunn.
Carex vahlii Schkuhar. Carex alpina Sw. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants
less than 15 cm high <Baffin Island>, or more than 15 cm high <Greenland>.
(11) Plants 5-15(-35) cm high. (15) Plants tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown.
(21) Plants with short horizontal stems, or without easily seen horizontal
stems. (28) Stem scales absent. (32) Stems erect <stiffly so>. (33) Stems
about as high as the leaves, or conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34)
Stems not filiform <0.6-1.3 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems triangular in cross
section <sharply so>. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths
abruptly contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths breaking down into fibres
<slowly>. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the
plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or brown, or reddish. (75) Ligules present.
(83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 4-10(-15) cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-3 mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades
hairy <scaberulous on midvein and margins>. (119) Leaf blade venation
parallel. (122) Leaf blades not septate nodulose <but cell end walls sometimes
prominent>. (126) Leaf blades flat, or revolute, or folded. (135) Flowering
stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence conspicuous and leaf-like, or much reduced, or scale-like. (140)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence extending
beyond the inflorescence, or similar in length to the inflorescence, or
shorter than the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence 0.5-2 cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath shorter than the
blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate.
(153) Inflorescence 3 spikes <usually, in a close cluster>. (154)
Inflorescence linear, or oblong, or obovate. (156) Individual spike(s) erect,
or ascending. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes sessile <superficially>, or
lateral spikes borne on pedicels <that are very short>. (158) Pedicels smooth.
(160) Inflorescence 1-2 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-10 mm wide. (168)
Terminal spike staminate at the base <club-shaped>. (197) Staminate flowers
inconspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium, or as long as
the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts brown, or black <tending to be monochrome>.
(200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than
the adjacent area of the bract <midvein dark>. (202) Floral bracts ovate, or
obtuse. (205) Floral bracts 1.8-2.3 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.6-2 mm
wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals
absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1.2-1.4 mm long. (311) Styles
slender, not extending beyond the beak, or slender, extending beyond the beak.
(313) Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by
a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia broadly ovate, or
obovate. (339) Perigynia 2.5-3 mm long. (340) Perigynia 1-1.4 mm wide. (341)
Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or ascending. (343) Perigynia black,
or brown, or green. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull.
(346) Perigynia glabrous. (347) Perigynia papillose. (348) Perigynia faintly
nerved. (352) Perigynia apex beaked with a short beak. (353) Perigynia apex
oblique, becoming slightly bidentate. (354) Achenes filling the perigynia.
(355) Achenes triangular. (360) 2n = 56. (364) Amphi-Atlantic. (365) Low
arctic <and Greenland>. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands.
(367) Uncommon. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Iqaluit, Beekman Peninsula,
Cumberland Sound, Cape Dorset, and Lake Harbour>. (373) Substrate type: acidic
<an indicator of acidic conditions>. (374) Rocky sites <always on Precambian
rocks, in dry tundra and on grassy slopes>. (375) Substrate imperfectly
drained, or dry. (376) Substrate acidic <found on Precambrian acid rocks,
Porsild 1957>. (378) Substrate with low organic content, or with high organic
content, or peat. (379) Wet meadows, or along streams, or tundra, or slopes
<and dry shelves>. (380) In wet meadows and along streams, it can be found
with Carex membranacea, Luzula arctica, and Carex capillaris. On drier slopes
it is typically found with grasses or Cladonia. (385) Porsild (1957). CAN
specimens annotated as this subspecies by T. Spribille, 1997. Superficially
similar to C. holostoma Drej. (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex
Tristigmatae. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycano.


Carex obtusata <Liljeb.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Lammprochlaenae (Drejer) Bailey.
(8) No synonymy in Kartesz (1994). (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (360)
2n = 52. (364) North American <Western arctic-alpine, Mackenzie, Alaska,
Yukon, and Rocky Mountains, Eurasia>. (367) Rare <not yet reported in the
Arctic Archipelago>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Hummocks, or
rocky sites <and dry gravelly places>. (385) Mentioned in Porsild (1957) as a
species whose distribution comes close to the Arctic Archipelago. It is mainly
a prairie, species although it appears to be on gravel further north. There
are a few other species in the same category e.g. C. cocinna, C. Mackenziei,
C. rotundata (in N. Quebec) mapped by Posild and Cody. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Primocarex. (431) Code
used for graphics files: cycaob.


Carex petricosa <Dew.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Aulocystis Dumortier. (8) Carex
macrogyna Turcz. ex Steud. Carex petricosa var. distichiflora (Boivin) Boivin.
(9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
15-35(-50) cm high. (15) Plants forming loose clusters. (20) Roots
pallid-brown, or red-brown. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal
stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (28) Stem scales present <along the horizontal
stems>. (32) Stems somewhat curving. (33) Stems about as high as the leaves
<Victoria Island record>, or conspicuously taller than the leaves <Continental
North America>. (34) Stems not filiform <but slender, 0.6-1.1 mm in diameter>.
(35) Stems triangular in cross section <with rounded angles>. (36) Stems
glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build
up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown <pallid>. (75) Ligules
present. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 10-30 cm long.
(90) Leaves 1-3 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades somewhat
curled <grayish green>. (105) Leaf blades scabrous <scaberulous, especially on
the margins>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat, or
revolute, or folded. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence conspicuous and leaf-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence shorter than the apex of the inflorescence.
(141) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 3-8 cm
long. (142) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
with sheath shorter than the blade <but conspicuously long>. (143) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence persistent. (151)
Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence
3-5 spikes. (154) Inflorescence oblong, or ovate, or obovate <oblanceolate>.
(156) Individual spike(s) ascending, or divergent. (157) Inflorescence lateral
spikes borne on pedicels <the lowermost spike usually remote>. (158) Pedicels
scabrous <scaberulous>. (160) Inflorescence 4-10(-15) cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 15-40 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike wholly staminate, or
staminate at the apex <sometimes with a second staminate or bisexual spike>.
(197) Staminate flowers conspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the
gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts brown. (200) Floral bracts with margins, and
sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent area of the bract. (202)
Floral bracts ovate, or obtuse, or acute. (205) Floral bracts 3.5-4.5(-5) mm
long. (206) Floral bracts 1.6-2 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252)
Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 3-3.5
mm long. (311) Styles slender, not extending beyond the beak, or slender,
extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 3 <or rarely 2>. (316)
Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an
achene. (338) Perigynia broadly ovate, or elliptic. (339) Perigynia 5-6 mm
long. (340) Perigynia 1.3-2 mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia
erect or ascending. (343) Perigynia brown. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345)
Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia scabrous <particularly near the beak>.
(348) Perigynia faintly nerved. (351) Perigynia with 2 keels. (352) Perigynia
apex beaked with a long beak. (353) Perigynia apex oblique, becoming slightly
bidentate. (354) Achenes not filling the upper part of the perigynia. (355)
Achenes triangular. (360) 2n = <?>. (364) North American <endemic in Northern
Cordillera>. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Victoria <single record from Walker
Bay>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Rocky sites. (375) Substrate
dry. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate rock. (378) Substrate with
low organic content. (379) Slopes. (385) Porsild 1957. (430) Section used by
Porsild (1957): Eucarex, tristigmatae. (431) Code used for graphics files:
cycape.


Carex physocarpa <J. & K. Presl>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (8) = Carex saxatilis var. major Olney.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (385) Porsild (1957), indicated that this
is a species that comes close to, but has not been recorded in the Arctic
Archipelago. Ford and Ball (1992) placed this taxon in synonymy with C.
saxatilis. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Not accepted in this
study. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycaph.


Carex rariflora <(Wahlenb.) Sm.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Limosae (O.F. Lang) Kükenthal.
(8) Carex rariflora (Wahlenb.) Sm. Carex rariflora var. androgyna Porsild =
Carex stygia Holm, non Fries . (9) Plants monoecious <rarely bisexual>. (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
(8-)10-20(-25) cm high. (15) Plants forming loose clusters. (20) Roots
pallid-brown. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with
short horizontal stems. (22) Plants stoloniferous. (28) Stem scales present
<on stolons>. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the
leaves. (34) Stems filiform <0.5-0.8 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems triangular in
cross section. (36) Stems glabrous <glaucous>. (57) Petioles absent. (68)
Sheaths tapering into the blade. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths not
forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths brown,
or reddish. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 2-8 cm
long. (90) Leaves 0.5-2 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades
straight. (105) Leaf blades hairy <on margins>. (119) Leaf blade venation
parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat, or folded <loosely>. (135) Flowering stems
with leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence much reduced, or scale-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence shorter than the apex of the inflorescence
<terminating in a short blade>. (141) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence (0.5-)1-3 cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence with sheath longer than the blade, or with
sheath shorter than the blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152)
Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 2-4 spikes. (154)
Inflorescence linear, or oblong. (156) Individual spike(s) erect <terminal
staminate spike>, or pendent <pistillate spikes>. (157) Inflorescence lateral
spikes borne on pedicels <spikes with 3-8 fowers>. (158) Pedicels smooth <and
capillary>. (160) Inflorescence 2.5-3(-4) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 10-20
mm wide. (168) Terminal spike wholly staminate. (197) Staminate flowers
conspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral
bracts brown, or black. (200) Floral bracts with margins the same colour as
the body of the bract <midvein conspicuously pale>. (202) Floral bracts ovate,
or cuspidate, or acute. (205) Floral bracts 3.5-4.5 mm long. (206) Floral
bracts 2.8-3.2 mm wide <broader than the perigynia>. (207) Floral bracts
glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent.
(285) Anthers 2-2.5 mm long. (311) Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas
per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium.
(325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 3.2-3.6
mm long. (340) Perigynia 1.5-1.8 mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile. (342)
Perigynia erect or ascending. (343) Perigynia green <pale>. (344) Perigynia
membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous. (347)
Perigynia papillose. (348) Perigynia faintly nerved. (351) Perigynia with 2
keels. (352) Perigynia apex merely conical. (354) Achenes filling the
perigynia. (355) Achenes triangular <when mature>. (360) 2n = 50 and 52. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin,
Southampton, Coats, and Victoria <new records since Porsild (1957>. (374) Wet
meadows, or moist areas <peaty places in the tundra or in wet moss by the edge
of brooks>. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes. (376)
Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate sand, or till, or moss. (378) Substrate
with high organic content, or peat <rarely>. (379) Wet meadows, or hummocks,
or around the margins of ponds, or marshes <occasionally>, or along streams
<often braided>, or tundra, or sea shore <on sand in swales>. (380) This
species occurs on alkaline till plains. In wet meadows, it is typically found
with Carex, Salix and Petasites frigidus. In wet humocky tundra common
associates are Ledum, Empetrum, Vaccinium and Eriophorum. (385) Porsild (1957)
does not discuss var. androgyna. Porsild 1957 does not discuss var.androgyna.
(428) Mapping records available don’t match Porsild (1957)- missing Lake
Harbour and Cape Dorset. (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex,
tristigmatae. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycara.


Carex rufina <Drej.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Phacocystis Dumortier. (8) No
synonym in Kartesz (1994). (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (385) This
species forms rather dense, flat tussocks of soft, dark-green leaves, among
which the culms are usually hidden. It is found in wet stony places, often by
the edge of ponds or on snowbeds. Porsild (1957) considered this a rare
species known only from a few stations in the Keewatin but probably occurring
in southern Baffin Island and Labrador. It is yet not known from the Arctic
Archipelago, P. Ball, personal commmunication 1997. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (426) Not accepted in this study. (431) Code used for graphics
files: cycarf.


Carex rupestris <All.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Petreae (O.F. Lang) Kükenthal.
(8) Carex rupestris All. var. rupestris Carex rupestris var. drummondiana
(Dewey) Bailey Carex rupestris subsp. drummondiana (Dewey) Holub. (9) Plants
monoecious. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high <usually>. (11) Plants
(4-)8-15(-20) cm high. (15) Plants forming loose clusters. (20) Roots
pallid-brown. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous <cord-like>. (28) Stem scales present.
(32) Stems erect. (33) Stems about as high as the leaves. (34) Stems not
filiform <rather coarse, 0.3-1.2 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems triangular in
cross section. (36) Stems scabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths
abruptly contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths
forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant, or not forming a
conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths brown, or reddish.
(75) Ligules present <up to 1.5 mm long, apex ovate>. (83) Leaves mostly basal
<compact plants>, or distributed along the stems <tall plants>. (89) Leaves
2-15 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-2.5 mm wide <0.5 mm wide when loosely rolled>.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades somewhat curled. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous, or hairy <scaberulous seen at 40X>. (119) Leaf blade venation
parallel. (126) Leaf blades triangular in cross section, or flat, or involute.
(135) Flowering stems without leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence absent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152)
Inflorescence a single spike. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160)
Inflorescence (0.6-)1-2 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-10 mm wide. (168)
Terminal spike staminate at the apex <with a few pistillate flowers at the
base>. (197) Staminate flowers inconspicuous. (198) Floral bracts longer than
the gynoecium <usually>. (199) Floral bracts brown <at the base, hyaline at
the apex>. (200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in
colour than the adjacent area of the bract. (202) Floral bracts obtuse. (205)
Floral bracts 3-3.5 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.5-3 mm wide. (207) Floral
bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals
absent. (285) Anthers 1.8-2.2 mm long. (311) Styles long and thick <extending
beyond the beak>. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (324)
Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia
obovate <oblanceolate>. (339) Perigynia 2.8-3.5 mm long. (340) Perigynia
2.6-2.9 mm wide. (341) Perigynia borne on a stalk. (342) Perigynia erect or
ascending. (343) Perigynia golden brown <pale towards the base>. (344)
Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous.
(348) Perigynia faintly nerved. (352) Perigynia apex merely conical. (354)
Achenes filling the perigynia. (355) Achenes triangular. (360) 2n = 50 and 52.
(364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Banks,
Victoria, and Parry Islands <Melville>, or Axel Heiberg and Southampton <as
well as Igloolik Island. The latter four islands are new records since
Porsild, 1957>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Hummocks, or rocky
sites <often on gravelly ridges or rocky ledges and associated with Dryas
intergrifolia>. (375) Substrate dry. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377)
Substrate gravel, or sand, or silt, or till <or in various combinations of the
above; occasionally also near bedrock outcrops>. (378) Substrate with low
organic content, or peat <older dry deposits>. (379) River terraces <older and
raised>, or tundra, or slopes, or ridges. (380) This species occurs on dry
barrens or tundra where it is found with Dryas Oxyria Astragalus and Poa
alpigena On steeper slopes it is found with Carex nardina and Saxifraga
Geological features associated with this species include till plains, old lake
beds with thick peat deposits, sand and gravel morainal systems, drumlin
ridges, and gravel kames. (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Primocarex.
(431) Code used for graphics files: cycarp.


Carex saxatilis <L.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Vesicariae Carey. (4) Kükenthal
in Engler, Pflanzenreich 4:20 (Heft 38):728. 1909. (8) Carex miliaris Michx.
Carex physocarpa Presl Carex vesicaria var. physocarpa (Presl) Kükenthal Carex
compacta R. Br. ex Dewey Carex ambusta Boott Carex miliaris var. obtusa L.
Bailey Carex miliaris var. major L. Bailey Carex miliaris f. longepedunculata
Lepage Carex pulla Gooden Carex rotundata Wahlenb. var. elatior Lange Carex
miliaris var. ungavensis Raymond. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants more than
15 cm high <usually>. (11) Plants (7-)15-30(-90) cm high. (15) Plants tufted.
(20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants
rhizomatous. (28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems about as
high as the leaves, or conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems not
filiform <0.4-1.7(-2.1) mm in diameter above the uppermost leaf>. (35) Stems
triangular in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous, or scabrous <scaberulous
near the inflorescence>. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades <tightly enveloping the stem, hyaline ventrally,
mouth truncate or concave>. (69) Sheaths breaking down into fibres. (70)
Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71)
Sheaths brown, or reddish. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.4-6.6(-10) mm
long <as wide as long, to slightly longer than wide, obtuse to the apex>. (83)
Leaves mostly basal, or distributed along the stems <in the lower third, 3-9
per fertile stem>. (89) Leaves 4.5-36(-44) cm long. (90) Leaves 0.9-4.8(-6.3)
mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades somewhat curled. (105) Leaf
blades glabrous <sometimes scaberulous on the margins>. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence conspicuous and leaf-like.
(140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence similar
in length to the inflorescence, or shorter than the apex of the inflorescence
<lower leaves on the stem often extend beyond the inflorescence>. (141) Leaf
or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence (0.6-)1.5-12(-19)
cm long <0.2 -2.9(-4.2) mm wide>. (142) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence sheathless. (143) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence persistent. (151) Inflorescence
spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 2-3(-6) spikes.
(156) Individual spike(s) erect. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes borne on
pedicels. (158) Pedicels scabrous <on ridges>. (160) Inflorescence 2.5-14(-20)
cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-45 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike wholly
staminate. (197) Staminate flowers conspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter
than the gynoecium, or as long as the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts black, or
pale grey. (200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in
colour than the adjacent area of the bract. (202) Floral bracts ovate, or
acute. (205) Floral bracts 1.9-4.3(-5) mm long. (206) Floral bracts 0.9-2.1 mm
wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals
absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1.1-3.4(-4.1) mm long. (311) Styles
slender, extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 2. (316)
Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an
achene. (338) Perigynia broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 2.2-4.8(-5.5) mm long.
(340) Perigynia 1.1-3 mm wide. (341) Perigynia borne on a stalk <0-0.3(-0.4)mm
long>. (342) Perigynia erect or ascending <forming an angle 25-75° with the
spike axis>. (343) Perigynia golden brown, or brown, or green. (344) Perigynia
membranous. (345) Perigynia surface glossy. (346) Perigynia glabrous. (347)
Perigynia tuberculate <slightly>. (348) Perigynia faintly nerved <with few
nerves>. (352) Perigynia apex beaked with a short beak <0.2-0.8 mm>. (353)
Perigynia apex oblique, becoming slightly bidentate. (354) Achenes not filling
the upper part of the perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular. (360) 2n = 80.
(364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands.
(367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Victoria.
(373) Substrate type: calcareous. (385) Porsild 1957 noted that this is a
variable species which is represented by vars. miliaris (Michx.) Bailey and
rhomalea Fern., the former subarctic and barely entering the area in southern
Baffin Island. These varieties were not taken up by Ford and Ball (1992) who
also merged C. physocarpa with this taxon. Ford and Ball (1992) stated that C.
saxatilis occurs throughout arctic and boreal areas of Eurasia. It is most
variable in North America and this may account for the proliferation of names
on this continent. While much of the variation in North America occurs on a
local scale or is due to phenotypic plasticitiy there is an underlying trend
for plants to be largest in the west with a decrease in size eastwards across
the North American continent. The establishment of clinal variation in
northern latitudes is often explained b the splitting of a species range into
isolated populations during the Late Plestocene; remigration during the
Holocene; followed by the secondary contact of these populations, which have
become variously differentiated during their period of isolation (Barton and
Charlesworth 1984; Prentice 1986). The persistence of the present day
morphologic pattern could be explained by the existence of a selective
gradient across North America, which is obscured by localized divergence and
plasticity. Alternatively, the weak morphocline currently exhibited by C.
saxatilis could be a relict of a more distinct assemblage of taxonomic
entitites that have decayed through introgression and localized divergence.
Carex saxatilis occurs in a wide variety of open moist habitats. It is often
found as a dominant in open cyperoid wetlands where it is commonly associated
with other species of Carex as well as Eriophorum and Equisetum. Carex
saxatilis also occurs in roadside ditches, Sphagnum bogs, sandy beaches,
openings in spruce muskeg, seasonally wet ponds, wet gravel, mud flats, and
standing water along the shorelines of lakes ponds, and slow moving streams.
In more southerly habitats C. saxatilis is almost always associated with
shoreline habitats and is absent from surrounding graminoid wetlands. This
sedge may not compete well with more robust, temperate species and in these
southerly stations may be reliant on water level fluctuations to eliminate
competing vegetation. Specimen CAN 262100 has a terminal staminate spike and
an adjacent predominantly pistillate spike with a few staminate flowers. (430)
Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex, tristigmatae. (431) Code used for
graphics files: cycasx.


Carex scirpoidea <Michx.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Scirpinae (Tuckerm.) Kükenthal.
(8) Carex athabascensis F.J. Herm. Carex scirpiformis Mackenzie Carex
scirpoidea var. convoluta Kükenthal Carex scirpoidea var. scirpiformis
(Mackenzie) ONeill & Duman Carex scirpoidea var. stenochlaena Holm Carex
stenochlaena (Holm) Mackenzie. (9) Plants dioecious. (10) Plants less than 15
cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants (4-)8-20(-30) cm high. (15)
Plants forming loose clusters. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with short
horizontal stems <that are stout>. (22) Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous.
(28) Stem scales present <black, brown, or reddish>. (32) Stems erect. (33)
Stems about as high as the leaves, or conspicuously taller than the leaves
<usually>. (34) Stems not filiform <0.3-0.8 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems
triangular in cross section <sharply so>. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles
absent. (68) Sheaths tapering into the blade. (69) Sheaths breaking down into
fibres <slowly>. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the base
of the plant. (71) Sheaths green <or translucent>. (75) Ligules present. (83)
Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 3-12 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.3-3(-4) mm wide.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous, or hairy <margins and midvein minutely scaberulous>. (119) Leaf
blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades circular in cross section, or flat
<loosely rolled>. (135) Flowering stems with leaves, or without leaves. (138)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence present, or
absent. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
conspicuous and leaf-like, or much reduced, or scale-like <if applicable>.
(140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence shorter
than the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence 0.4-3.5 cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath shorter than the blade.
(143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence a single spike.
(156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160) Inflorescence 0.9-1.2 cm long
<staminate>, or 0.8-2(-3) cm long <pistillate>. (161) Inflorescence 3.5-6(-12)
mm wide <staminate spikes>, or 2.5-4 mm wide <pistillate spikes>. (168)
Terminal spike wholly staminate <for male inflorescence>. (197) Staminate
flowers conspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199)
Floral bracts brown, or black. (200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes
mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent area of the bract <a narrow,
translucent zone>. (202) Floral bracts obtuse. (205) Floral bracts 2-3 mm
long. (206) Floral bracts 1-1.5 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts hairy all over.
(208) Floral bracts hairs very dense. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals
absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 2-3 mm long. (311) Styles slender,
extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation
basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338)
Perigynia broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 2.5-3.2 mm long. (340) Perigynia
1-1.2 mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or ascending.
(343) Perigynia brown <at the apex>, or green <at the base>. (344) Perigynia
membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia scabrous <with
prominent reddish brown, or translucent hairs>. (348) Perigynia appearing
nerveless. (351) Perigynia with 2 keels. (352) Perigynia apex beaked with a
short beak. (353) Perigynia apex not bidentate. (354) Achenes filling the
perigynia. (355) Achenes triangular. (360) 2n = 62 and 64. (364) North
American. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367)
Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, and Ellesmere <new records since
Porsild (1957)>, or Banks, Victoria, King William, Southampton, and Coats <as
well as Digges, and Air Force Islands>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous.
(374) Hummocks, or rocky sites <dry areas>. (375) Substrate dry, or
imperfectly drained <less commonly>. (376) Substrate calcareous, or halophytic
<occasionally>. (377) Substrate rock <sometimes on carbonate plates or
cobble>, or gravel, or sand, or till, or moss. (378) Substrate peat, or with
low organic content. (379) Wet meadows <less commonly>, or along streams, or
river terraces <older and raised>, or lake shores <on beach ridges>, or
tundra, or slopes, or sea shore <on rocky sites under the influence of sea
spray>. (380) Although this species can be found in damp places with Sphagnum
or Equisetum arvense, it is more commonly found in dry tundra with Dryas
integrifolium, Epilobium latifolium, Oxytropis maydelliana and Carex bigelowii
subsp. bigelowii, or Poa glauca. On beach ridges, it can be found with
Saxifraga tricuspidata. (384) There has been a significant range extension
north to Ellesmere Island since Porsild (1957). (385) Porsild 1957. (430)
Section used by Porsild (1957): Primocarex. (431) Code used for graphics
files: cycasc.


Carex subspathacea <Wormsk. ex Hornem.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Phacocystis Dumortier. (8) Carex
salina Wahlenb. var. subspathacea (Wormsk. ex Hornen.) Tuckerman. ×subviridula
Fern. (flava × viridula). ×sullivanti Boott (gracillima × hirifolia).
xsupergoodenoughii Küenthal (nigra × rectra). (9) Plants monoecious. (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 2-15 cm high. (15) Plants matted
<turf forming>. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with conspicuously long
horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous.
(28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the
leaves, or about as high as the leaves. (35) Stems triangular in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths tapering into
the blade. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous
build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown. (75) Ligules
present. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves (1-)2-7(-10) cm long. (90)
Leaves 0.6-2.4 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight.
(105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf
blades flat, or involute. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence conspicuous and
leaf-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence extending beyond the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence 1-3.5 cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath shorter than the
blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate.
(153) Inflorescence 2-3 spikes <often hidden among the leaves>. (156)
Individual spike(s) erect, or ascending. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes
borne on pedicels <that are sometimes very short>. (158) Pedicels smooth.
(160) Inflorescence 2-4 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-12 mm wide. (168)
Terminal spike wholly staminate <the pistillate spikes few flowered and
somewhat remote>. (197) Staminate flowers conspicuous. (198) Floral bracts as
long as the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts brown, or black. (200) Floral
bracts with margins the same colour as the body of the bract <midvein pale>.
(202) Floral bracts ovate <sometimes extended into a point, mucronate>. (205)
Floral bracts 2.8-3.2 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.6-2 mm wide. (207) Floral
bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals
absent. (285) Anthers 1.2-1.5 mm long. (311) Styles slender, not extending
beyond the beak, or slender, extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per
style 2. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium.
(325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 2.5-3 mm
long. (340) Perigynia 1.2-1.5 mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile. (342)
Perigynia erect or ascending. (343) Perigynia straw-coloured, or green. (344)
Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous.
(348) Perigynia appearing nerveless. (352) Perigynia apex beaked with a short
beak. (354) Achenes not filling the upper part of the perigynia. (355) Achenes
lenticular. (360) 2n = 78 and 80. (364) Circumpolar. (365) High arctic. (366)
Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin, Banks, Victoria, King William, and Coats <as well as Igloolik and
Prince Charles Islands>. (374) Moist areas <confined to the seacoast where it
grows in wet clay on sheltered beaches that are flooded at high tide>. (375)
Substrate imperfectly drained. (376) Substrate halophytic. (377) Substrate
gravel <occasionally>, or sand, or silt <often salt encrusted>. (378)
Substrate with high organic content, or peat. (379) Wet meadows, or around the
margins of ponds <on mud flats>, or marshes <brackish>, or river terraces
<near coast>, or sea shore <in coastal lagoons, on beach ridges, and strand
flats>. (380) Along the sea shore, this species is typically found just above
the high tide line with Puccinellia phryganodes turf. In river terraces,
common associates are Carex maritima, C. ursina, and Dupontia fisheri. (385)
Porsild (1957). (428) Porsild mapped Devon, which we don't have in CAN. (430)
Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex, distigmatae. (431) Code used for
graphics files: cycasb.


Carex supina <Willd ex Wahlenb.> subsp. spaniocarpa <(Steud.) Hultén>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Lamprochlaenae (Drej.) Bailey.
(8) Carex supina var. spaniocarpa (Steud.) Boivin. (9) Plants monoecious. (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants (3-)8-15 cm high. (15) Plants tufted,
or forming loose clusters. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22) Plants stoloniferous <stolons that
are brown, slender and from which arise tufts of leaves and culms>. (28) Stem
scales present <striate, sometimes reddish brown>. (32) Stems erect. (33)
Stems about as high as the leaves, or conspicuously taller than the leaves.
(34) Stems filiform <0.4-0.5 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems triangular in cross
section <sharply so>. (36) Stems glabrous, or scabrous. (57) Petioles absent.
(68) Sheaths tapering into the blade. (69) Sheaths breaking down into fibres.
(70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71)
Sheaths brown, or reddish <purplish>. (75) Ligules present <less than 1 mm
long>. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 3-10 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-1.5
mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight <crowded>. (105)
Leaf blades glabrous, or scabrous <most clearly seen at the tips of the
leaves>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat <or
loosely folded>. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence much reduced, or scale-like.
(140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence shorter
than the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence 0.5-2 cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath shorter than the blade.
(143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate.
(153) Inflorescence 2-3 spikes. (154) Inflorescence oblong <pistillate>, or
ovate <staminate>. (156) Individual spike(s) ascending. (157) Inflorescence
lateral spikes sessile <few flowered>. (160) Inflorescence (0.5-)1-2 cm long.
(161) Inflorescence 5-10 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike wholly staminate
<linear>. (197) Staminate flowers conspicuous. (198) Floral bracts as long as
the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts brown. (200) Floral bracts with margins,
and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent area of the bract
<broad and translucent>. (202) Floral bracts ovate <broadly>. (205) Floral
bracts 2.5-3 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.3-1.6 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts
glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent.
(285) Anthers 2.2-2.5 mm long. (311) Styles slender, not extending beyond the
beak. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit
surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia broadly
ovate. (339) Perigynia 2.5-3 mm long. (340) Perigynia 1.3-1.6 mm wide. (341)
Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or ascending <divergent>. (343)
Perigynia black, or brown <often green towards the base>. (344) Perigynia
membranous. (345) Perigynia surface glossy <slightly>. (346) Perigynia
glabrous <slightly scaberulous near the apex seen at 40X>. (348) Perigynia
faintly nerved. (351) Perigynia with 2 keels <slight>. (352) Perigynia apex
beaked with a long beak. (354) Achenes filling the perigynia. (355) Achenes
triangular. (360) 2n = <?>. (364) North American. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of
limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare <low arctic>. (371)
Arctic Islands: Baffin <Kimmirut (Lake Harbour), Iqaluit, Clyde Inlet and Pond
Inlet>. (374) Rocky sites <non-calcareous dry ledges, outcrops and gravel>.
(375) Substrate dry. (377) Substrate rock <often granite>, or gravel, or sand.
(378) Substrate with low organic content. (379) Ridges, or cliffs <outcrops
and ledges>. (380) Found in dry, non-calcareous places with Carex nardina, C.
rupestris, C. scirpoidea and Kobresia myosuroides. (385) Porsild 1957,
recognized the taxon as subspecies. (428) Posild says it grows in
non-calcareous places. (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex,
tristigmatae. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycasp.


Carex ursina <Dewey>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Vignea, sect. Glareosae G. Don. (4) American
J. Sci. Arts. 27: 240. 1835. (8) No synonymy in Kartesz (1994). (9) Plants
monoecious. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 2-6(-10) cm high
<<CAN 18360>>. (15) Plants tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with
short horizontal stems, or without easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem
scales present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the leaves, or about
as high as the leaves. (34) Stems not filiform <0.3-1.0 mm in diameter>. (35)
Stems triangular in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent.
(68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths persisting.
(70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71)
Sheaths greyish brown. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89)
Leaves 1-5 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-0.8 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95)
Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous <margins and mid-vein
scaberulous towards the leaf apex>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126)
Leaf blades folded. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (138) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence absent. (151)
Inflorescence spicate, or head-like. (152) Inflorescence a single spike. (154)
Inflorescence globose or subglobose. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160)
Inflorescence 0.4-0.8 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 4-6 mm wide. (168) Terminal
spike staminate at the base. (197) Staminate flowers inconspicuous. (198)
Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts brown. (200)
Floral bracts with margins the same colour as the body of the bract. (202)
Floral bracts obtuse. (205) Floral bracts 2.2-2.6 mm long. (206) Floral bracts
1.6-2 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254)
Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1-1.3 mm long. (311) Styles
slender, extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 2. (316)
Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an
achene. (338) Perigynia globose, or subglobose, or broadly ovate. (339)
Perigynia (1.8-)2.3-2.7 mm long. (340) Perigynia 2.1-2.3 mm wide. (341)
Perigynia borne on a stalk <approximately 0.5 mm long>. (342) Perigynia
spreading at maturity. (343) Perigynia straw-coloured, or whitish <greyish
green>. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346)
Perigynia glabrous. (348) Perigynia faintly nerved. (351) Perigynia with 2
keels. (352) Perigynia apex merely conical. (354) Achenes filling the
perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular. (360) 2n = 64. (364) Circumpolar. (365)
Coastal. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin, Ellesmere, and Axel Heiberg <new since Porsild, 1957>, or
Parry Islands <Melville and Prince Patrick, both new since Porsild, 1957>, or
Victoria, King William, Southampton, and Coats <as well as Prince Charles, and
Winter Islands>. (373) Substrate type: halophytic. (374) Wet meadows <a
pronounced littoral species of shelthered sea and lagoon shores subject to
flood by high tide>. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained. (376) Substrate
halophytic. (377) Substrate gravel, or sand, or silt, or clay. (378) Substrate
with low organic content, or with high organic content. (379) Wet meadows, or
around the margins of ponds <brackish; also in peat bogs>, or marshes <salt>,
or tundra, or sea shore <tidal flats, beach ridges and in silt near the mouths
of rivers>. (380) A pronounced littoral species of sheltered sea and lagoon
shores, subject to flooding by high tide. It is often a dominant species,
forming dense mats, and can be found with Puccinellia phryganodes and
Stellaria humifusa. (385) Porsild 1957. (428) Porsild (1957) mapped records on
Devon and Banks Islands that we have not traced. (430) Section used by Porsild
(1957): Primocarex. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycaur.


Carex vaginata <Tausch>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Paniceae G. Don. (8) Carex
saltensis Bailey C. sparsiflora (Wahlenb.) Steud. (9) Plants monoecious. (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high <usually>. (11) Plants
(7-)10-20(-40) cm high. (15) Plants forming loose clusters. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous. (28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems
erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems not
filiform <0.6-1.3 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths breaking down into fibres. (70)
Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71)
Sheaths greyish brown <pallid>. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves distributed
along the stems. (89) Leaves 3-15 cm long. (90) Leaves 1-3.6 mm wide. (93)
Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous, or
scabrous <minutely scaberulous on leaf margins>. (119) Leaf blade venation
parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence present. (139)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence conspicuous
and leaf-like, or much reduced, or scale-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence shorter than the apex of the
inflorescence <usually>. (141) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with
the inflorescence 0.4-1(-3) cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence with sheath longer than the blade <usually>.
(143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
persistent <inflated>. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence
multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 2-3(-4) spikes. (156) Individual spike(s)
ascending <lax, the staminate one on a somewhat stout divergent pedicel>.
(157) Inflorescence lateral spikes borne on pedicels <somewhat distant>. (160)
Inflorescence (3-)5-10(-20) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 2-7(-15) mm wide.
(168) Terminal spike wholly staminate. (197) Staminate flowers conspicuous.
(198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts orange
brown. (200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in
colour than the adjacent area of the bract <midvein broad and green>. (202)
Floral bracts ovate, or lanceolate. (205) Floral bracts 1.8-2.8 mm long. (206)
Floral bracts 1.4-1.8 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth
absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 3-3.5 mm long.
(311) Styles slender, not extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style
3. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325)
Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia sub-lanceolate, or broadly ovate. (339)
Perigynia 2.2-3(-5) mm long. (340) Perigynia 1.2-1.5 mm wide. (341) Perigynia
sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or ascending. (343) Perigynia straw-coloured,
or green. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull. (346)
Perigynia glabrous. (348) Perigynia faintly nerved. (352) Perigynia apex
beaked with a long beak. (353) Perigynia apex oblique, becoming slightly
bidentate. (354) Achenes not filling the upper part of the perigynia. (355)
Achenes triangular. (360) 2n = 32. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (366)
Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin <Kimmirut>, or Banks <Bernard River, a new record since Porsild (1957>,
or Victoria <Holman and Cambridge Bay>, or Southampton <Southampton, Coral
Harbour>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous <sometimes on granite>. (374) Moist
areas <moderately to imperfectly drained substrates often on rolling grassy
terrain>. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained. (376) Substrate calcareous.
(377) Substrate silt, or till. (379) Depressions of low centre polygons, or
tundra, or slopes <and ledges>. (380) Found infrequently on rolling or gently
sloping till plains on turf or with Dryas. On slopes, it has been reported
with Salix richardsonii and ericaceous shrubs. (428) A voucher for one Porsild
record on Victoria Island has not been found at CAN. A voucher for one Porsild
record near Cape Low, Southampton Island, has not been found at CAN. (430)
Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex, Tristigmatae. (431) Code used for
graphics files: cycavg.


Carex williamsii <Britt.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora of
North America project: subgenus Carex, sect. Hymenochlaenae. (8) No synonymy
in Kartesz (1994). (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high.
(11) Plants 5-15 cm high. (15) Plants tufted. (21) Plants without easily seen
horizontal stems. (28) Stem scales absent. (32) Stems somewhat curving. (33)
Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems filiform <0.3-0.5 mm in
diameter>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous.
(57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths tapering into the blade. (69) Sheaths
breaking down into fibres. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at
the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown. (75) Ligules present. (83)
Leaves distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 2-6 cm long. (90) Leaves
0.4-0.7 mm wide <filiform>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades
straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous <or scaberulous on the margins>. (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades triangular in cross section,
or caniculate. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence much reduced, or scale-like. (140)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence shorter than
the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence 0.5-1.5 cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence with sheath shorter than the blade. (143)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence persistent.
(151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate. (153)
Inflorescence 2-5 spikes <few flowered>. (156) Individual spike(s) ascending
<and widely spaced on a zigzag rachis>. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes
borne on pedicels. (158) Pedicels smooth. (160) Inflorescence 1-1.5 cm long.
(161) Inflorescence 2-4 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike staminate at the base.
(197) Staminate flowers inconspicuous. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the
gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts orange brown, or green <on midvein>. (200)
Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the
adjacent area of the bract. (202) Floral bracts ovate, or cuspidate. (204)
Floral bracts falling early. (205) Floral bracts 1-2.5 mm long. (206) Floral
bracts 1-1.4 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent.
(254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1-1.2 mm long. (311)
Styles slender, not extending beyond the beak. (313) Stigmas per style 3.
(316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit
an achene. (338) Perigynia sub-lanceolate, or elliptic. (339) Perigynia
2.5-3.2 mm long. (340) Perigynia 0.9-1.2 mm wide. (341) Perigynia borne on a
stalk <that is short>. (342) Perigynia spreading at maturity. (343) Perigynia
golden brown. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia surface dull <or
slightly glossy>. (346) Perigynia glabrous. (348) Perigynia strongly nerved.
(351) Perigynia with 3 keels. (352) Perigynia apex beaked with a long beak
<the tapering apex of the perigynia>. (353) Perigynia apex not bidentate.
(354) Achenes not filling the upper part of the perigynia. (355) Achenes
triangular. (360) 2n = 18. (364) North American <Alaska to Labrador>. (365)
Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare.
(371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Iqaluit and Ogac Lake, both in Frobisher Bay>.
(373) Substrate type: calcareous <sandy soil by the edge of small ponds>.
(375) Substrate imperfectly drained <in one site, described as “dripping
wet”>. (376) Substrate halophytic. (377) Substrate sand, or moss. (379) Wet
meadows, or hummocks, or sea shore. (380) Found in grassy wet meadows with
Eriophorum angustifolium and Carex membranacea. (384) Mentioned in Porsild
(1957) as similar to C. capillaris and occurring from Alaska to Labrador.
Porsild and Cody (1980) mapped records from Southern Baffin Island. Four
collections from Baffin Island, Iqaluit have been made since Porsild (1957).
It occurs in the tundra of Hudson Bay coast and in the field may be mistaken
for C. capillaris. (430) Section used by Porsild (1957): Eucarex,
tristigmatae. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycawl.


Carex amblyorhyncha <Krecz.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (8) =Carex marina subsp. marina. (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (385) Name used in Porsild (1957). Halliday and
Chater (1969c) discuss this name and conclude that C. marina is the earlier
name for the taxon. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Not accepted in
this study. (431) Code used for graphics files: cycaam.


Carex arctogena <H.Smith>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (8) =Carex capitata subsp. arctogena (H.
Sm.) Hiitonen. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (385) Name used in Porsild
(1957). Here treated as Carex capitata subsp. arctogena (H. Sm.) Hiitonen.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Not accepted in this study. (431)
Code used for graphics files: cycaar.


Eleocharis acicularis <(L.) Roemer & J.A. Schultes>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (8) Eleocharis acicularis var.
occidentalis Svens. Eleocharis acicularis var. typica Svens. Eleocharis
reverchonii Svens. . (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 2.5-10 cm
high. (15) Plants matted. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with short
horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous <depending on the
substrate>. (28) Stem scales present <on horizontal stems>. (32) Stems erect.
(33) Stems about as high as the leaves. (34) Stems filiform <0.1-0.2 mm in
diameter>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous.
(57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths tapering into the blade. (69) Sheaths
breaking down into fibres. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at
the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or brown. (75) Ligules
present. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 1-6 cm long. (90) Leaves
0.4-0.6 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (105)
Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades
circular in cross section <pressing flat>. (135) Flowering stems without
leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
absent <spike terminal>. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence a
single spike. (160) Inflorescence 0.3-0.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 1-2 mm
wide. (168) Terminal spike with both sexes in each floret <no fertile
specimens are known from the Arctic Archipelago>. (193) Flowers small, less
than 5 mm in diameter or length. (198) Floral bracts longer than the
gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts green <reddish>. (200) Floral bracts with
margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent area of the
bract. (202) Floral bracts ovate, or lanceolate. (205) Floral bracts 2-3 mm
long. (206) Floral bracts 1.2-1.8 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252)
Perianth represented by bristles. (253) Perianth bristles inconspicuous. (254)
Sepals absent <possibly represented by the bristles>. (265) Petals absent.
(285) Anthers 1-1.4 mm long. (312) Styles base an enlarged, bulge, separated
from the top of the achene <which distinguishes this species from
Trichophorum>. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (325)
Fruit an achene. (334) Fruit perianth persisting as bristles. (360) 2n = 20.
(364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Iqaluit (new since
Porsild, 1957) and Kimmirut>. (374) Aquatic <forming green carpets on soft mud
on the bottom of shallow ponds>. (375) Substrate aquatic. (377) Substrate
silt. (378) Substrate with high organic content. (379) Around the margins of
ponds. (380) Forms soft green carpets on the bottom of ponds. Found with Carex
chordorrhiza. (385) Porsild (1957), gave the authority for the generic name as
Lineaus, but this was a mistake as the genus was described by Robert Brown.
(431) Code used for graphics files: cyelac.


Eriophorum <L.>

      (1) Cotton grass. (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (10) Plants less than 15
cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 7-24(-50) cm high. (15) Plants
single-stemmed, or tufted, or cushion-like. (20) Roots colourless, or
pallid-brown, or black. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems,
or without easily seen horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous, or
stoloniferous. (28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems
conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems not filiform. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent.
(68) Sheaths tapering into the blade, or abruptly contracted into the blades.
(69) Sheaths persisting, or breaking down into fibres. (70) Sheaths forming a
conspicuous build up at the base of the plant, or not forming a conspicuous
build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or brown. (75)
Ligules present, or absent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 3-14(-50) cm
long. (90) Leaves 0.5-25 mm wide <mean 4>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf
blades straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
parallel. (122) Leaf blades not septate nodulose. (126) Leaf blades triangular
in cross section, or flat, or folded. (135) Flowering stems with leaves, or
without leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence present, or absent. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence conspicuous and leaf-like, or much reduced,
or scale-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence shorter than the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 0.2-6 cm long <mean
1.6>. (142) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
with sheath longer than the blade, or with sheath shorter than the blade.
(143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence
persistent. (148) Pistilate or bisexual spike(s) with empty bracts at the
base. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence a single spike, or
multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 2-5 spikes. (156) Individual spike(s) erect,
or pendent. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes borne on pedicels <if
applicable>. (158) Pedicels smooth, or scabrous. (160) Inflorescence 1-6 cm
long. (161) Inflorescence 10-30-60 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike wholly
staminate, or staminate at the apex, or with both sexes in each floret. (198)
Floral bracts longer than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts brown, or black,
or pale grey. (200) Floral bracts with margins the same colour as the body of
the bract, or with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the
adjacent area of the bract. (201) Floral bracts reflexed, or not reflexed.
(202) Floral bracts acute. (205) Floral bracts 4-15 mm long. (206) Floral
bracts 1-4 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth represented
by bristles. (253) Perianth bristles silky white, or bristles dull white or
yellowish. (254) Sepals absent <possibly represented by the bristles>. (265)
Petals absent. (285) Anthers 0.5-1.9(-3.8) mm long. (312) Styles base not
enlarged, continuous with the achene. (316) Placentation basal. (325) Fruit an
achene. (334) Fruit perianth persisting as bristles. (360) 2n = 58, or 60.
(364) Circumpolar, or amphi-Atlantic, or North American. (365) Arctic, or high
arctic, or low arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands, or of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common, or uncommon. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or
Victoria. (373) Substrate type: calcareous, or peat. (374) Wet meadows, or
moist areas, or hummocks, or snow beds. (425) Genus. (431) Code used for
graphics files: er.


Eriophorum angustifolium subsp. angustifolium <Honck.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (4) Vollst. Syst. Verz. 153. 1782. (10)
Plants more than 15 cm high <usually>. (11) Plants (7-)15-30(-40) cm high.
(14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed. (20) Roots
colourless, or pallid-brown. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal
stems <often missing from herbarium specimens>. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (28)
Stem scales present <on horizontal stems>. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems
conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems not filiform <0.5-2.0 mm in
diameter>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section, or triangular in
cross section <at the apex>. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68)
Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades <more or less inflated>. (69)
Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the
base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or brown <pallid orange>. (72)
Sheaths with the margins fused to the apex. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75)
Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.5-1 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78)
Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices
obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems <in the
lower half>. (89) Leaves 5-25 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.8-3(-5) mm wide. (93)
Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (96) Leaf blades spreading from
the vertical. (105) Leaf blades glabrous, or scabrous <minutely scaberulous on
margins>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein
conspicuously larger than the lateral veins. (126) Leaf blades flat, or
caniculate. (133) Leaf apices acuminate. (135) Flowering stems with leaves.
(136) Flowering stems glabrous. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence conspicuous and leaf-like, or much reduced, or
scale-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence shorter than the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 0.5-4.5 cm long. (142)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath
shorter than the blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with
the inflorescence persistent. (148) Pistilate or bisexual spike(s) with empty
bracts at the base, or without empty bracts at the base. (151) Inflorescence
spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence (1-)2-5 spikes.
(155) Inflorescence dense. (156) Individual spike(s) erect, or pendent <at
maturity>. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes borne on pedicels <subtended by
1-3 more or less leaf like bracts>. (158) Pedicels smooth. (160) Inflorescence
2-6(-12) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 20-60 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike with
both sexes in each floret. (198) Floral bracts longer than the gynoecium.
(199) Floral bracts black, or pale grey <translucent; the single vein not
reaching to the tip of the scale>. (200) Floral bracts with margins the same
colour as the body of the bract. (202) Floral bracts acute. (203) Floral
bracts widest at base. (205) Floral bracts 4-7 mm long. (206) Floral bracts
1.5-2.5 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth represented by
bristles. (253) Perianth bristles dull white or yellowish <40-50 mm long>.
(254) Sepals absent <possibly represented by the bristles>. (265) Petals
absent. (285) Anthers (2.5-)3-3.5(-5) mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 3.
(316) Placentation basal. (325) Fruit an achene. (334) Fruit perianth
persisting as bristles. (360) 2n = 58. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic. (366)
Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin, Ellesmere, and Parry Islands <Melville and Bathurst>, or Banks,
Victoria, Prince of Wales, Somerset, King William, Southampton, and Coats <as
well as Igloolik, Resolution, Digges, Prince Charles, and Stephansson
Islands>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous, or peat. (374) Wet meadows <or by
the edge of ponds where this species often forms pure stands>. (375) Substrate
aquatic <emergent>, or imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes, or on
solifluction slopes. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate sand, or silt
<often in fluvial materials>, or moss, or gravel, or rock <bouldery rubble>.
(378) Substrate with high organic content, or peat. (379) Wet meadows, or
around the margins of ponds, or marshes, or river terraces, or tundra. (380)
Often the dominant plant, or in of Carex / Salix wet meadows in areas grazed
by musk oxen. A common associate is C. aquatilis var. stans. Eriophorum
angustifolium can also occur in drier tundra with Dryas. Typical geological
site characteristics are drumlin ridges and intervening swales, calcareous
alluvial outwash plains, knolls of dolomitic boulders, and sandstone plateaus.
(385) Porsild (1957) recognized this taxon. Jermy (1980) described it as very
variable. (431) Code used for graphics files: cyeran.


Eriophorum angustifolium subsp. triste <(T. Fries) Hultén>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (8) Eriophorum triste (Th. Fr.) Hadac &
Löve. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
8-20(-30) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed.
(20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems.
(22) Plants rhizomatous <rhizomes often missing from herbarium specimens>.
(28) Stem scales present <on rhizomes>. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems
conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems not filiform. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section, or triangular in cross section <at the
apex>. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths not forming
a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown,
or brown. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused to the apex. (73) Sheaths
glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.5-1 mm long. (77) Ligules
membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80)
Ligules apices obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (83) Leaves distributed along the
stems <in the lower half>. (89) Leaves 4-10 cm long. (90) Leaves 1-3.5 mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (96) Leaf blades
spreading from the vertical. (105) Leaf blades glabrous, or scabrous <minutely
scaberulous along the margins>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf
blades midvein conspicuously larger than the lateral veins. (126) Leaf blades
flat, or caniculate. (133) Leaf apices acuminate. (135) Flowering stems with
leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence conspicuous and leaf-like, or much reduced,
or scale-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence shorter than the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 1-3(-5) cm long. (142)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath
shorter than the blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with
the inflorescence persistent. (148) Pistilate or bisexual spike(s) with empty
bracts at the base, or without empty bracts at the base. (151) Inflorescence
spicate. (152) Inflorescence multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 2-4(-5) spikes.
(155) Inflorescence dense. (156) Individual spike(s) erect, or pendent <at
maturity>. (157) Inflorescence lateral spikes borne on pedicels <subtended by
1-3 bracts>. (158) Pedicels scabrous. (160) Inflorescence 3-5 cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 20-40 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike with both sexes in each
floret. (198) Floral bracts longer than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts
black, or pale grey <translucent>. (200) Floral bracts with margins the same
colour as the body of the bract. (202) Floral bracts acute. (203) Floral
bracts widest at base. (205) Floral bracts 5-7 mm long. (206) Floral bracts
2-3 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth represented by
bristles. (253) Perianth bristles dull white or yellowish <40-50 mm long>.
(254) Sepals absent <possibly represented by the bristles>. (265) Petals
absent. (285) Anthers 3-3.8 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (316)
Placentation basal. (325) Fruit an achene. (334) Fruit perianth persisting as
bristles. (360) 2n = 60. (364) Amphi-Atlantic. (365) High arctic. (366)
Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Axel Heiberg, Parry Islands, Cornwallis, Banks,
Victoria, King William, and Southampton <as well as Eglington, Vansittart, Air
Force, and Jenny Lind Islands>. (374) Moist areas, or snow beds <In mineral
soil, often in open clay spots on the tundra and by the edge of ponds”
(Porsild 1957)>. (375) Substrate aquatic <occasionally found in stream beds>,
or imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes, or dry <rarely>. (376) Substrate
calcareous. (377) Substrate rock <occasionally>, or sand, or clay, or moss.
(378) Substrate with high organic content, or peat. (379) Wet meadows, or
marshes, or along streams, or slopes <wet, sometimes mossy>. (380) Most often
reported along streams. It can be found in wet meadows with Carex misandra and
Arctogrostis; it is also reported in moist ridged fens with Dryas and
Cassiope. (385) Recognized as Eriophorum triste (Th. Fr.) Hadac & Löve by
Porsild (1957). Jermy (1980) noted that in Eriophorum angustifolium, several
arctic and alpine variants have been described, of which the most distinctive
is this taxon that differs from subspecies angustifolium by having narrower
leaves, capitate inflorescences and blackish scales. These characters were not
found to reliably distinguish between the two taxa in the Canadian Arctic
Islands. (431) Code used for graphics files: cyerat.


Eriophorum brachyantherum <Trautv. & C.A. Meyer>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (4) In Middendorff, Reise Nord. Ost.
Sibir. 1(2) 3: 98, 1856. (8) Var. brachyanterum SY = Eriophorum opacum
(Bjornstr.) Fern. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 15-30(-45) cm
high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <smaller and less
compact than E. vaginatum>. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants without
easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems erect. (33)
Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems not filiform <0.6-1.0
mm in diameter>. (35) Stems triangular in cross section <in the upper half>,
or circular or oval in cross section <in the lower half>. (36) Stems glabrous.
(37) Culm nodes not exposed. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths forming a
conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths brown <pallid>.
(72) Sheaths with the margins fused to the apex. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75)
Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.5-1 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78)
Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices
obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 6-20(-25)
cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-1 mm wide <filiform>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95)
Leaf blades straight. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading
from the vertical. (105) Leaf blades glabrous <or minutely scaberulous seen at
40X>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in
size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades triangular in cross
section. (133) Leaf apices acuminate. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136)
Flowering stems glabrous. (137) Uppermost leaf or reduced bract arising above
the middle of the culm. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with
the inflorescence absent. (148) Pistilate or bisexual spike(s) with empty
bracts at the base <the lowest larger and bract like, opaque and 3-veined>.
(151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence a single spike. (155)
Inflorescence dense. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160) Inflorescence 1-2
cm long. (161) Inflorescence 10-25(-40) mm wide. (168) Terminal spike with
both sexes in each floret. (194) Flowers sessile or subsessile. (198) Floral
bracts longer than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts black, or pale grey.
(200) Floral bracts with margins the same colour as the body of the bract.
(201) Floral bracts not reflexed <distinguishes this taxon from E. vaginatum
s.l.>. (202) Floral bracts acute. (203) Floral bracts widest at base. (205)
Floral bracts 6-10 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.5-4 mm wide. (207) Floral
bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth represented by bristles. (253) Perianth
bristles dull white or yellowish <often brown tinged, about 20 mm long>. (254)
Sepals absent <possibly represented by the bristles>. (265) Petals absent.
(285) Anthers (0.5-)1-1.5(-2) mm long <narrowly elliptical>. (313) Stigmas per
style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (325) Fruit an achene. (334) Fruit perianth
persisting as bristles. (355) Achenes triangular. (360) 2n = 58. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Clyde Inlet and
Pangnirtung, the latter is new since Posild, 1957>, or Southampton <Coral
Harbour>. (374) Wet meadows <muskeg species that rarely extends far beyond
treeline>. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained. (376) Substrate calcareous.
(377) Substrate rock, or silt. (378) Substrate with high organic content, or
peat. (379) Wet meadows, or river terraces, or tundra. (380) A muskeg species
that rarely extends far beyond treeline. (385) New record from Victoria Island
since Porsild (1957). (431) Code used for graphics files: cyerbr.


Eriophorum callitrix <Cham. ex C.A. May.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high
<usually>. (11) Plants (8-)10-15(-20) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants tufted <solitary small tufts>. (20) Roots pallid-brown, or black.
(21) Plants without easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem scales present.
(32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems
not filiform <0.8-1.2 mm in diamter>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed. (57) Petioles
absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths
persisting. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the
plant. (71) Sheaths brown <pallid>. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused to the
apex. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.5-1 mm long.
(77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules transversely
oblong. (80) Ligules apices obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (83) Leaves mostly
basal. (89) Leaves 3.5-12 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.8-1.2 mm wide <filiform>.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (96) Leaf blades appressed
to the stem. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel.
(120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126)
Leaf blades triangular in cross section <drying slightly involute>. (133) Leaf
apices acuminate. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems
glabrous. (137) Uppermost leaf or reduced bract arising below the middle of
the culm. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence absent. (148) Pistilate or bisexual spike(s) with empty bracts
at the base. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence a single spike.
(155) Inflorescence dense. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160)
Inflorescence 1-2 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 10-25 mm wide. (168) Terminal
spike with both sexes in each floret. (194) Flowers sessile or subsessile.
(198) Floral bracts longer than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts black, or
pale grey. (200) Floral bracts with margins the same colour as the body of the
bract. (201) Floral bracts not reflexed <distinguished this taxon from E.
vaginatum s.l.>. (202) Floral bracts acute. (203) Floral bracts widest at
base. (205) Floral bracts 5-10 mm long. (206) Floral bracts 2.5-5 mm wide.
(207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth represented by bristles. (253)
Perianth bristles silky white. (254) Sepals absent <possibly represented by
the bristles>. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 0.5-1(-1.2) mm long. (313)
Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (325) Fruit an achene. (334)
Fruit perianth persisting as bristles. (355) Achenes triangular. (360) 2n =
60. (364) North American. (365) Low arctic. (367) Common. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin, Banks, and Victoria. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374)
Hummocks. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes
<occasionally>, or dry <rarely>. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate
silt, or till. (378) Substrate with high organic content. (379) Wet meadows,
or around the margins of ponds, or river terraces, or tundra. (380) This
species can form dense stands. In wet meadows and tundra, it is typically
found with Carex aquatilis var. stans and Salix in areas grazed by musk oxen.
In boggier areas, it is found with E. angustifolium; in drier areas, with
Dryas. (385) Porsild (1957). (428) 3 or 4 dots missing from Baffin Island that
were mapped in Porsild. (431) Code used for graphics files: cyercl.


Eriophorum chamissonis <C.A. Meyer>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (8) Eriophorum russeolum Fries ex Hartman
var. albidum (W. Nyl.) Fern. Eriophorum chamissonis C.A. Meyer var. albidum
(W. Nyl.) Fern. E. russeolum Fries var. albidum Nyl. E. russeolum Fries var.
leucothrix (Bomgr.) Hultén. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
20-30(-50) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (20)
Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous. (28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems
erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems not
filiform <1.0-2.5 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed. (57) Petioles
absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths
persisting. (70) Sheaths not forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the
plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or brown <sometimes reddish>. (72) Sheaths
with the margins fused to the apex. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules
present. (76) Ligules 0.5-1 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules
glabrous. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices obtuse. (81)
Ligules entire. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 10-30 cm long. (90)
Leaves 1-2.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (96)
Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (105) Leaf
blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein
similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat. (133) Leaf
apices acuminate. (135) Flowering stems with leaves <the lamina of cauline
leaves absent, or present as a membranous apex to a slightly inflated sheath>.
(136) Flowering stems glabrous. (137) Uppermost leaf or reduced bract arising
below the middle of the culm. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence absent <the lower most floral scale sometimes enlarged
with three veins>. (148) Pistilate or bisexual spike(s) with empty bracts at
the base <2-6>. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence a single
spike. (154) Inflorescence oblong, or obovate <higher than wide at maturity>.
(155) Inflorescence dense. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160)
Inflorescence 2.5-5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 20-40 mm wide. (168) Terminal
spike with both sexes in each floret. (194) Flowers sessile or subsessile.
(198) Floral bracts longer than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts pale grey.
(200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than
the adjacent area of the bract. (202) Floral bracts acute. (203) Floral bracts
widest at base. (205) Floral bracts 5-7(-15) mm long. (206) Floral bracts 2-4
mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth represented by bristles
<c. 30 mm long>. (253) Perianth bristles silky white <sometimes with a
brownish tinge>. (254) Sepals absent <possibly represented by the bristles>.
(265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1.4-1.7(-3) mm long <linear>. (313) Stigmas
per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (325) Fruit an achene. (334) Fruit
perianth persisting as bristles. (355) Achenes triangular. (360) 2n = 58.
(364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Clyde Inlet,
Inugsuin Fiord, and Iqaluit>. (374) Wet meadows <beside shallow ponds>. (375)
Substrate imperfectly drained. (377) Substrate silt. (378) Substrate with high
organic content. (379) Around the margins of ponds <in mud>, or marshes. (380)
The species has been reported in marshes with Carex aquatilis var. stans.
(385) Porsild (1957) recognized varieties in this taxon but they are of
dubious merit. (428) The following records mapped by Porsild (1957) are
missing: Kimmirut, around Nettelling Lake, Eclipse Sound, Bordern Peninsula
and somewhere on Southampton Island. (431) Code used for graphics files:
cyerch.


Eriophorum scheuchzeri <Hoppe>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (4) Bot. Taschenb. 1800: 104. 1800. (8)
Eriophorum scheuchzeri var. tenuifolium Ohwi. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high
<usually>. (11) Plants (10-)15-25(-40) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants single-stemmed. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems <that are thin>. (22) Plants rhizomatous,
or stoloniferous <not always present on herbarium specimens>. (28) Stem scales
present <on stolons>. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than
the leaves. (34) Stems not filiform <1.0-2.0 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not
exposed. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (69) Sheaths persisting <breaking down slowly>. (70) Sheaths not
forming a conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish
brown <pallid, or yellowish brown>. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused to the
apex. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.5-1 mm long.
(77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules transversely
oblong. (80) Ligules apices obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (83) Leaves mostly
basal. (89) Leaves 3-8 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.6-1(-2) mm wide. (93) Leaf
blades linear <caniculate at the base, triangular towards the tip>. (95) Leaf
blades straight. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the
vertical. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel.
(120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126)
Leaf blades flat, or folded. (133) Leaf apices acuminate. (135) Flowering
stems with leaves, or without leaves <often there is a modified leaf that is
mostly inflated sheath present>. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (137)
Uppermost leaf or reduced bract arising below the middle of the culm. (138)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence absent <the
lower most floral scale sometimes enlarged with 3 veins>. (148) Pistilate or
bisexual spike(s) with empty bracts at the base <2-6>. (151) Inflorescence
spicate. (152) Inflorescence a single spike. (154) Inflorescence oblong, or
ovate <wider than higher>. (155) Inflorescence dense. (156) Individual
spike(s) erect. (160) Inflorescence 1.5-3 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 20-50
mm wide. (168) Terminal spike with both sexes in each floret. (194) Flowers
sessile or subsessile. (198) Floral bracts longer than the gynoecium
<ovate-lanceolate>. (199) Floral bracts black, or pale grey. (200) Floral
bracts with margins the same colour as the body of the bract. (202) Floral
bracts acute. (203) Floral bracts widest at base. (205) Floral bracts
4-10(-14) mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1-2 mm wide <empty bracts up to 6 mm
wide>. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth represented by bristles.
(253) Perianth bristles silky white <up to 30 mm long, often at right angles
or deflexed>. (254) Sepals absent <possibly represented by the bristles>.
(265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 0.5-1 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 3.
(316) Placentation basal. (325) Fruit an achene. (334) Fruit perianth
persisting as bristles. (355) Achenes triangular. (360) 2n = 60. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367)
Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Ellesmere, and Parry Islands <Melville>,
or Banks and Victoria. (374) Wet meadows <and shallow water by the edge of
ponds where the plants often form pure stands>. (375) Substrate aquatic, or
imperfectly drained. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate sand, or
silt. (378) Substrate with low organic content <bare sand>, or with high
organic content. (379) Wet meadows, or around the margins of ponds, or
depressions of low centre polygons, or marshes, or along streams <on raised
terraces above braided channels>, or river terraces, or lake shores. (380) Can
form dense stands, almost monocultures. Also found in wet meadows with Carex,
or in marshes as emergents with Pleuropogon sabinei. Commonly grazed by musk
oxen. (385) Name used in Porsild (1957). (428) Many points are mapped in
Porsild that aren't at CAN. (431) Code used for graphics files: cyersc.


Eriophorum vaginatum subsp. vaginatum <L.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (4) Sp. Pl. 52. 1753. (8) Eriophorum
vaginatum var. spissum (Fern.) Boivin Eriophorum spissum Fern. Eriophorum
spissum var. erubescens (Fern.) Fern. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high
<occasionally>, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants (10-)15-40(-80) cm high.
(14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <forming large compact
tussocks>. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants without easily seen horizontal
stems. (28) Stem scales absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously
taller than the leaves. (34) Stems not filiform <0.5-1.5 mm in diameter>. (35)
Stems triangular in cross section <near the inflorescence>, or circular or
oval in cross section <near the base>. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes
not exposed. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths forming a conspicuous build up
at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or reddish <or pale
orange-brown>. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused to the apex. (73) Sheaths
glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.3-0.6 mm long. (77) Ligules
membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80)
Ligules apices acute. (81) Ligules entire. (83) Leaves distributed along the
stems <in the lower half>. (89) Leaves 5-10 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.7-1.2 mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades linear <with brown fibrous sheaths>. (95) Leaf blades
straight. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the
vertical. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel.
(120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126)
Leaf blades triangular in cross section. (133) Leaf apices acuminate. (135)
Flowering stems with leaves <1-2, not closely associated with the
inforescence, leaf blade absent or a dark membranous apex to the strongly
inflated sheath>. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (137) Uppermost leaf or
reduced bract arising below the middle of the culm, or arising above the
middle of the culm. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence absent. (148) Pistilate or bisexual spike(s) with empty bracts
at the base. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence a single spike.
(154) Inflorescence globose or subglobose <depressed>. (155) Inflorescence
dense. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160) Inflorescence 1.5-4 cm long.
(161) Inflorescence 10-35 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike with both sexes in
each floret. (194) Flowers sessile or subsessile. (198) Floral bracts longer
than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts pale grey. (200) Floral bracts with
margins the same colour as the body of the bract <acuminate, transluent,
1-3(-5) veined>. (201) Floral bracts reflexed <after anthesis>. (202) Floral
bracts acute. (203) Floral bracts widest at base. (205) Floral bracts 8-14 mm
long. (206) Floral bracts 2-4 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252)
Perianth represented by bristles. (253) Perianth bristles silky white. (254)
Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers (2-)2.5-3 mm long. (313)
Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (325) Fruit an achene. (334)
Fruit perianth persisting as bristles. (355) Achenes triangular <ovoid; 2-3 mm
long>. (360) 2n = 58. (385) Porsild (1957) considered this a western species;
east of the 100th meridian it gradually passes into subsp. spissum”. In FNA it
is treated as subsp. vaginatum (western-northern) and subsp. spissum
(eastern-southern) but there is a lot of overlap. (428) This will soon be
merged with spissum. There was no habitat info for vaginatum on its own. (431)
Code used for graphics files: cyervg.


Eriophorum vaginatum subsp. spissum (Fern.) Hultén

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (4) Rhodora 27: 208. 1926. (8) Eriophorum
vaginatum var. spissum (Fern.) Boivin Eriophorum spissum Fern. Eriophorum
spissum var. erubescens (Fern.) Fern. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high. (11)
Plants 15-30 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <very
compacted>. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants without easily seen
horizontal stems. (28) Stem scales absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems
conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems not filiform <1.0-1.2 mm in
diameter>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous.
(37) Culm nodes not exposed. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths forming a
conspicuous build up at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or
reddish. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused to the apex <young leaves>. (73)
Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.3-0.6(-1) mm long. (77)
Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong. (80)
Ligules apices obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (83) Leaves distributed along the
stems <in the lower half>. (89) Leaves 8-15 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.6-1.1 mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (96) Leaf blades
appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous, or scabrous <scaberulous on the margins>. (107) Leaf blades
adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf
blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other
veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades triangular in cross section <loosely>.
(133) Leaf apices acuminate. (135) Flowering stems with leaves <1-2 not
closely associated with the inflorescence, reduced and mainly sheath>. (136)
Flowering stems glabrous. (137) Uppermost leaf or reduced bract arising below
the middle of the culm, or arising above the middle of the culm. (138) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence absent <the lower most
floral scales sometimes enlarged with 1-3(-5) veins>. (148) Pistilate or
bisexual spike(s) with empty bracts at the base. (151) Inflorescence spicate.
(152) Inflorescence a single spike. (154) Inflorescence globose or subglobose.
(155) Inflorescence dense. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160)
Inflorescence 1.5-5.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 10-35 mm wide. (168)
Terminal spike with both sexes in each floret. (193) Flowers small, less than
5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers sessile or subsessile. (198) Floral
bracts longer than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts pale grey. (200) Floral
bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent
area of the bract. (201) Floral bracts reflexed. (202) Floral bracts acute.
(203) Floral bracts widest at base. (205) Floral bracts 7-10 mm long. (206)
Floral bracts 2-4 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth
represented by bristles. (253) Perianth bristles silky white <at maturity>.
(254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 3. (285) Anthers 1.6-2
mm long. (308) Styles partially fused. (309) Styles 3. (313) Stigmas per style
3. (316) Placentation basal. (325) Fruit an achene. (334) Fruit perianth
persisting as bristles. (355) Achenes triangular. (360) 2n = 58. (364) North
American <eastern>. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Eclipse Sound,
Pangnirtung, Iqaluit, Koukdjuak River, and Kimmirut>. (374) Wet meadows, or
moist areas <on raised hillocks>. (375) Substrate aquatic, or imperfectly
drained, or dry. (376) Substrate calcareous. (378) Substrate with high organic
content. (379) Hummocks <with heath>, or around the margins of ponds, or
marshes <along the edges>, or tundra. (380) Found in wet meadows with Carex
and Eriophorum. In shallow water at the edge of pools, it can be found with
with Hippurus vulgaris and Ranunculus pallasii. On drier tundra, it is
associated with mosses, heath, and lichens. (431) Code used for graphics
files: cyervs.


Eriophorum triste <(Th. Fr.) Hadac>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (8) = Eriphorum angustifolium var. triste.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (385) Porsild 1957, now Eriophorum
angustifolium subsp. triste. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code
used for graphics files: cyertr.


Kobresia <Willd.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (9) Plants bisexual <with some unisexual
flowers>. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11)
Plants 5-35 cm high. (15) Plants tufted <densely>. (20) Roots pallid-brown, or
black. (21) Plants without easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem scales
absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems about as high as the leaves, or
conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems filiform, or not filiform.
(35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57)
Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (69)
Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths forming a conspicuous build up at the base of
the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or reddish. (75) Ligules present. (83)
Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 3-15 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.3-1.2 mm wide.
(95) Leaf blades straight, or somewhat curled. (105) Leaf blades glabrous.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades folded, or caniculate.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves, or without leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence present, or absent. (139) Leaf
or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence much reduced, or
scale-like <if applicable>. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence shorter than the apex of the inflorescence. (141) Leaf
or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 0-1 cm long. (142)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath
longer than the blade, or with sheath shorter than the blade. (143) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence persistent. (151)
Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence a single spike, or multispicate.
(153) Inflorescence 2-20 spikes <if applicable>. (154) Inflorescence linear,
or oblong, or ovate. (156) Individual spike(s) erect, or ascending. (157)
Inflorescence lateral spikes sessile. (160) Inflorescence 1-25 cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 2-8 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike staminate at the apex <usually
a single staminate flower below which is either a single pistillate flower or
two to four flowers, one pistillate and 1-3 staminate>. (197) Staminate
flowers inconspicuous. (198) Floral bracts longer than the gynoecium
<scale-like and open to one side (a perigynium); perigynia sometimes enclosing
additional scales>. (199) Floral bracts orange brown. (200) Floral bracts with
margins the same colour as the body of the bract, or with margins, and
sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent area of the bract, or
with margins and midvein paler than body of bract. (202) Floral bracts ovate,
or obtuse, or acute. (205) Floral bracts 2.3-6.5 mm long. (206) Floral bracts
1-3 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous, or hairy all over. (252) Perianth
absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 1.3-2.7 mm
long. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit
surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (354) Achenes not filling
the upper part of the perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular, or triangular.
(360) 2n = 58, or 72-76. (364) Circumpolar, or North American. (365) Arctic,
or high arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands, or of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Banks, or Victoria. (373)
Substrate type: calcareous, or peat. (374) Moist areas, or hummocks, or rocky
sites. (425) Genus. (431) Code used for graphics files: cyko.


Kobresia myosuroides <(Vill.) Fiori & Paol.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (4) Fl. Anal. Ital. 1: 125. 1896. (8) K.
bellardii (All.) Degel Carex myosuroides Vill. (9) Plants monoecious. (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
(5-)10-20(-35) cm high. (15) Plants tufted <very tightly>. (20) Roots
pallid-brown, or black. (21) Plants without easily seen horizontal stems. (28)
Stem scales absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems about as high as the leaves
<or slightly taller>. (34) Stems filiform <wiry, 0.4-0.6 mm in diameter>. (35)
Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles
absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades <closed, somewhat
glossy>. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths forming a conspicuous build up
at the base of the plant <similar to Carex nardina>. (71) Sheaths greyish
brown, or reddish <pale orange>. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.1-0.2 mm
long. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89) Leaves 2-15(-20) cm long. (90) Leaves
0.2-0.7 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (105)
Leaf blades glabrous. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous <sometimes scabrous
along the margins>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades
folded, or caniculate <without a pronounced midrib>. (135) Flowering stems
with leaves, or without leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence absent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152)
Inflorescence a single spike <in appearence; made up of 10-20 tiny spike-like
panicles "spikelets"; the terminal spikelets with several male flowers, the
lateral spikelets with one male flower above and one female flower below>.
(154) Inflorescence linear. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160)
Inflorescence 1-3 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 2-4(-5) mm wide. (168) Terminal
spike staminate at the apex. (197) Staminate flowers inconspicuous <each
subtended by a staminate scale>. (198) Floral bracts longer than the
gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts orange brown. (200) Floral bracts with margins
the same colour as the body of the bract <margins hyaline; midvein distinct
almost to the tip>. (202) Floral bracts ovate. (205) Floral bracts 2-3.5(-4.5)
mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1.5-2 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous <apex
obtuse or cuspidate>. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals
absent. (285) Anthers 1.5-2 mm long. (309) Styles 1. (311) Styles long and
thick <black, and longer than the floral scales>. (313) Stigmas per style 3.
(316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit
an achene. (338) Perigynia broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 2-3.5 mm long. (340)
Perigynia 1-1.2 mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or
ascending. (343) Perigynia brown. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia
surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous. (348) Perigynia appearing nerveless.
(352) Perigynia apex without a beak. (354) Achenes not filling the upper part
of the perigynia. (355) Achenes triangular <loosely so, sometimes becoming
black balls of fungus infection>. (360) 2n = 52, or 56-58, or 60. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367)
Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Axel Heiberg, Banks,
and Victoria. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Hummocks, or rocky sites
<well drained, weathered sandy silt, such as Dryas or Saxifrage solufluction
slopes>. (375) Substrate imperfectly drained <rarely>, or on solifluction
slopes, or dry <usually>. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate rock, or
gravel, or sand, or clay. (378) Substrate with low organic content, or with
high organic content <less commonly>. (379) River terraces <older and raised>,
or tundra <dry Dryas mounds>, or slopes, or ridges <and raised beaches>. (380)
Typically found in dry, sparsely vegetated places, often on exposed slopes
with Saxifraga, Dryas, or Salix. Occassionally reported in moister areas in
wet swales near beaches. (431) Code used for graphics files: cykomy.


Kobresia sibirica <(Turcz. ex Ledeb.) Boeck.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (4) Linnaea, 39: 7. 1875. (8) K.
hyperborea A.E. Porsild. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm
high. (11) Plants (5-)15-30(-40) cm high. (15) Plants tufted <tightly>. (20)
Roots pallid-brown, or black. (21) Plants without easily seen horizontal
stems. (28) Stem scales absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems about as high as
the leaves <or slightly taller>. (34) Stems not filiform <0.7-1.3 mm in
diameter>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous.
(57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades
<closed>. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths forming a conspicuous build up
at the base of the plant. (71) Sheaths greyish brown, or reddish <orange>.
(75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.3-0.4 mm long. (83) Leaves mostly basal.
(89) Leaves (2-)5-10(-15) cm long. (90) Leaves (0.25-)0.5-0.8(-1.2) mm wide.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126) Leaf blades circular in
cross section, or caniculate <cuneate, with a distinct midvein>. (135)
Flowering stems without leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated
with the inflorescence absent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152)
Inflorescence a single spike <composed of 8-20 tiny spike-like panicles
"spikelets"; the terminal spikelets with 1 male flower, the lateral spikelets
with 1-2 male flowers above, 1 female flower below, and 1-3 sterile scales>.
(154) Inflorescence oblong, or ovate. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160)
Inflorescence 1-2 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 4-8 mm wide. (168) Terminal
spike staminate at the apex. (197) Staminate flowers inconspicuous. (198)
Floral bracts longer than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts orange brown.
(200) Floral bracts with margins, and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than
the adjacent area of the bract, or with margins and midvein paler than body of
bract <margins hyaline; midvein distinct only near the base>. (202) Floral
bracts obovate <to circular, apex obtuse>. (205) Floral bracts (3.5-)4.5-6.5
mm long. (206) Floral bracts 1-3 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252)
Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers
(2-)2.2-2.7(-3) mm long. (309) Styles 1. (311) Styles long and thick <black
and longer than the floral scales>. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (316)
Placentation basal. (324) Fruit surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an
achene. (338) Perigynia broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 3.5-5.5 mm long. (340)
Perigynia 1.4-1.8 mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or
ascending. (343) Perigynia brown. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia
surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous. (348) Perigynia faintly nerved <with
fine veins>. (352) Perigynia apex without a beak. (354) Achenes not filling
the upper part of the perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular <oval>. (360) 2n =
58. (364) North American <western>. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Victoria
<Cambridge Bay>. (374) Hummocks <and dry grassy slopes>. (375) Substrate dry.
(378) Substrate peat, or with low organic content. (379) Lake shores, or
tundra. (384) A local and variable species, not yet fully understood. Some
authors consider K. hyperborea and K. macrocarpa to be a distinct endemic
North American species, while others include these and K. siberica in the
southwest Asian species K. schoenoides (C. A. Meyer) Steudel. In the Asian
plants, the bisexual spikelets are reported to have three staminate flowers
and no sterile scales (P. Ball, personnal communication. 1998). (431) Code
used for graphics files: cykosb.


Kobresia simpliciuscula <(Wahlenb.) Mack.>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (4) Bull. Torrey Bot. Club, 50: 349. 1923.
(8) Carex simpliciuscula Wahlenb. (9) Plants monoecious. (10) Plants less than
15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 3-20(-35) cm high. (15)
Plants tufted <tightly>. (20) Roots pallid-brown, or black. (21) Plants
without easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem scales absent. (32) Stems
erect. (33) Stems about as high as the leaves, or conspicuously taller than
the leaves. (34) Stems not filiform <0.5-1 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent.
(68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades <closed, not shiny>. (69)
Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths forming a conspicuous build up at the base of
the plant. (71) Sheaths reddish <brown>. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves
mostly basal. (89) Leaves 2-10(-20) cm long. (90) Leaves (0.2-)0.6-1.5(-2) mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous <unlike Carex nardina>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (126)
Leaf blades folded, or caniculate. (135) Flowering stems with leaves, or
without leaves. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence absent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence
multispicate. (153) Inflorescence 2-7 spikes <few flowered, secondary spikes
contracted into a lax head-like inflorescence, in tall specimens the lowermost
spike is somewhat remote>. (154) Inflorescence linear <rarely>, or ovate.
(156) Individual spike(s) erect, or ascending. (157) Inflorescence lateral
spikes sessile <or almost so>. (160) Inflorescence 0.8-1.5 cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 3-10 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike staminate at the apex. (197)
Staminate flowers inconspicuous. (198) Floral bracts longer than the
gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts orange brown. (200) Floral bracts with margins,
and sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent area of the bract, or
with margins and midvein paler than body of bract <margins hyaline, midvein
distinct almost to the tip>. (202) Floral bracts ovate, or acute <apex obtuse
to sub-acute>. (205) Floral bracts 2.3-2.6 mm long. (206) Floral bracts
1.3-1.7 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth absent. (254)
Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers (1-)1.3-1.6(-2) mm long.
(309) Styles 1. (311) Styles long and thick <black and longer than the floral
scales>. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (316) Placentation basal. (324) Fruit
surrounded by a perigynium. (325) Fruit an achene. (338) Perigynia
sub-lanceolate, or broadly ovate. (339) Perigynia 1.9-2.3 mm long. (340)
Perigynia 0.8-1.2 mm wide. (341) Perigynia sessile. (342) Perigynia erect or
ascending. (343) Perigynia brown. (344) Perigynia membranous. (345) Perigynia
surface dull. (346) Perigynia glabrous. (348) Perigynia appearing nerveless.
(352) Perigynia apex without a beak. (354) Achenes not filling the upper part
of the perigynia. (355) Achenes lenticular. (360) 2n = 70-75. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Victoria, and Coats.
(373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Moist areas <wet tundra, wet clay by
lakeshores, imperfectly drained glacial till plains, summer dry ponds>. (375)
Substrate imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes, or dry. (376) Substrate
calcareous. (377) Substrate rock, or gravel, or till. (378) Substrate with low
organic content, or with high organic content, or peat <older, dry>. (379)
Around the margins of ponds, or marshes, or river terraces, or tundra, or
slopes <rocky>, or sea shore <on tidal flats>. (380) Typically local and rare.
Found in marshes with Carex rariflora and C. capillaris, on seepage slopes
with Trichophorum caespitosum and Saxifraga aizoides, and on dry peaty tundra
with Dryas. (428) Porsild, 1957 mapped the following specimens that we don't
have: Baffin, Pond's Inlet Eclipse sound, Victoria Is. around Cambridge Bay.
(431) Code used for graphics files: cykosm.


Trichophorum caespitosum <(L.) Hartman>

      (2) Cyperaceae, sedge family. (8) Scirpus caespitosus L. subsp.
austriacus (Pallas) Asch. & Graebn. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11)
Plants 7-15 cm high. (15) Plants tufted. (20) Roots pallid-brown. (21) Plants
without easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem scales present. (32) Stems
erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (34) Stems filiform
<wiry, 0.4-0.6 mm in diameter>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section.
(36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (68) Sheaths tapering into the
blade. (69) Sheaths persisting. (70) Sheaths forming a conspicuous build up at
the base of the plant <composed of sheaths and flat scales 2-3 mm wide>. (71)
Sheaths greyish brown. (75) Ligules present. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (89)
Leaves 0.5-3 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.2-1 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95)
Leaf blades straight. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
parallel. (126) Leaf blades flat <or slightly folded, bract-like, callous
tipped, and easily overlooked>. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (138) Leaf
or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf
or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence much reduced, or
scale-like. (140) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence similar in length to the inflorescence. (141) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence 0.3-0.6 cm long. (142) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence with sheath longer
than the blade. (143) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence persistent. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence a
single spike. (156) Individual spike(s) erect. (160) Inflorescence 0.3-0.6 cm
long. (161) Inflorescence 1.5-3 mm wide. (168) Terminal spike with both sexes
in each floret. (198) Floral bracts as long as the gynoecium <often with other
empty bracts between the reduced leaf and the florets>. (199) Floral bracts
orange brown. (200) Floral bracts with margins and midvein paler than body of
bract. (202) Floral bracts ovate. (205) Floral bracts 2-4 mm long. (206)
Floral bracts 1.8-2.2 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts glabrous. (252) Perianth
represented by bristles. (253) Perianth bristles inconspicuous. (254) Sepals
absent. (265) Petals absent. (285) Anthers 2-2.5 mm long. (309) Styles 1.
(312) Styles base not enlarged, continuous with the achene <which
distinguishes this species from Eleocharis>. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (316)
Placentation basal. (325) Fruit an achene. (334) Fruit perianth persisting as
bristles <that are inconspicuous>. (360) 2n = 104. (364) Circumpolar. (365)
Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare.
(371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Beekman Peninsula (new since Porsild, 1957),
Cormack Bay and Kimmirut>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Moist areas
<in mucky peaty sites; often on seepage slopes>. (375) Substrate imperfectly
drained, or on seepage slopes. (376) Substrate calcareous. (378) Substrate
with high organic content, or peat. (379) Hummocks <peaty>, or along streams,
or tundra <in damp hollows>, or slopes <in springy or grassy places>. (431)
Code used for graphics files: cytrca.


Diapensiaceae <Lindley>

      (1) Diapensia family. (2) Diapensiaceae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Nymphaeiflorae. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code
used for graphics files: di.


Diapensia lapponica <L.>

      (1) Diapensia. (2) Diapensiaceae. (8) Diapensia lapponica L. var.
laponica Diapensia lapponica var. obovata F. Schmidt Diapensia lapponica
subsp. obovata (f. Schmidt) Hultén Diapensia lapponica var. rosea Hultén
Diapensia obovata (F. Schmidt) Nakai. (11) Plants 1-5(-8) cm high. (12) Plants
shrubs. (13) Plants dwarf shrubs. (15) Plants tufted, or cushion-like, or
matted. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect <branching beneath the recent
season’s leaves in older tussocks>. (36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules absent.
(57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves whorled <in dense
ascending, but compact whorls>. (87) Leaves simple <yellowish green in upper
portion, pale at the base>. (89) Leaves 0.5-1.5(-2) cm long. (90) Leaves
0.05-0.3 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades obovate. (97) Leaf blades leathery. (105)
Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation appearing single-veined. (135)
Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (149) Flowers
solitary. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (255)
Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals green <to yellowish or pinkish>.
(259) Sepals glabrous. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals fused <half way so that
the corolla is deeply lobed>. (268) Petals white <or cream>. (276) Corolla
rotate, or cup-like. (277) Stamens 5. (278) Stamens free. (280) Stamens fused
to the corolla <between each petal>. (293) Carpels monomerous. (296) Ovary
superior. (309) Styles 1. (316) Placentation axile. (325) Fruit a capsule.
(326) Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit 2-3 mm long. (328) Fruit 1-2 mm wide. (330)
Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown, or red <pale pinkish or
yellowish>. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting, or
styles not persistent <lost when fruit dehiscence occurs late in the season>.
(357) Seeds 0.7-1.1 mm long <tetrahedral in shape>. (358) Seeds brown <pale
cream under a conspicuous tan brown reticulation on the surfaces>. (359) Seeds
ridged. (360) 2n = <12, 9 counts in Löve and Löve 1975>. (364) Not
circumpolar, amphi-Atlantic, amphi-Beringian, or North American <Greenland and
Labrador>. (373) Substrate type: acidic <rocky ledges or gravel>. (383)
Potential use as an oil; cultivated garden plant - Day & Scott, 1984. (384)
Scott, ????; Day & Scott, 1981; Scott & Day, 1983; Day & Scott, 1984. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (400) Dahlgren's Order 1 1. Ericales. (406)
Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Diapensiales. (413)
Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Ericanae. (418)
Takhtajan's Order Ericales. (421) 20 species. (422) 6 genera. (423) Genera in
study region: Berneuxia, Diapensia, Galax, Pyxidanthera, Schizocodon, Shortia.
(425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: didila.


Empetraceae <A.F. Gray>

      (1) Crowberry family. (2) Empetraceae, crowberry family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (400) Dahlgren's Order 1 1. Ericales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Ericales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Ericanae. (418) Takhtajan's
Order Ericales. (421) 10-20 species. (422) 3 genera. (423) Genera in study
region: Empetrum. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (428)
Possibly 20 records. (431) Code used for graphics files: em.


Empetrum nigrum <L.>

      (1) Crowberry, Curlewberry. (2) Empetraceae, crowberry family. (8)
Emptrum nigrum subsp. hermaphroditum (Lange ex Hagerup) Bocher Empetrum
earmesii Fern. & Wieg.) Boivin Empetrum rubrum Vahl Empetrum rubrum subsp.
eamesii (Fern.) & Wieg.) Cronq. Empetrum hermaphroditum Lange ex Hagerup. (9)
Plants monoecious, or dioecious <usually>, or bisexual. (11) Plants 5-10 cm
high <low, mat forming shrub in Arctic, occassionally growing somewhat errect
to 20-30 cm high in warmer areas or by rocks>. (12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants
dwarf shrubs. (15) Plants matted <with trailing branches>. (18) Taproot
absent. (21) Plants without easily seen horizontal stems <but branches usually
prostrate>. (32) Stems prostrate. (52) Stipules present <easily overlooked>.
(53) Stipules not sheathing. (54) Stipules colourless. (55) Stipules
scale-like or rudimentary <1.8-2.2 mm long, thin and membranous with wide
transparent margins that have numerous glandular hairs. Near the centre of
each stipule is green or brown>. (57) Petioles absent, or present <the slight
petiole is easily overlooked as the leaves are often tightly overlapping>.
(58) Petioles 0.1-0.2 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous, or marcescent. (84)
Leaves alternate <close together and approaching whorled>. (87) Leaves simple.
(89) Leaves 2-6 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-1 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(97) Leaf blades leathery, or succulent. (105) Leaf blades glabrous
<superficially the leaves appear glabrous>, or hairy. (106) Leaf blades with
hairs equally dense on both surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs glandular <tiny
glandular hairs seen at 40x>. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (132) Leaf margins
with hairs. (135) Flowering stems with leaves <single flowers are on “short
shoots” that arise laterally from the main axis and bear only scale leaves
below the flower>. (149) Flowers solitary. (150) Inflorescence axillary. (193)
Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length <0.1-0.2cm>. (195) Flowers
unisexual, or bisexual. (255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals green,
or purple <green at base, purple at top>. (259) Sepals glabrous. (266) Petals
3. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals purple. (277) Stamens 3. (278) Stamens
free. (296) Ovary superior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 3 <usually, but
the number is variable>. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 2-5. (325)
Fruit a drupe. (326) Fruit spherical. (327) Fruit 0.3-0.8 mm long. (328) Fruit
0.3-0.8 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit black.
(334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting <but not
enlarging>. (356) Seeds 2-9. (357) Seeds 1.6-1.8 mm long. (358) Seeds brown
<to pale reddish>. (359) Seeds verrucose <minute>. (360) 2n = 26 <13 counts in
Löve and Löve 1975>. (364) Circumpolar <Porsild 1964>. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin and Ellesmere <&Southhampton>. (373) Substrate type: acidic <Porsild
1964>. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (400) Dahlgren's Order 1 1. Ericales.
(406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Ericales.
(413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Ericanae.
(418) Takhtajan's Order Ericales. (421) 10-20 species. (422) 3 genera. (423)
Genera in study region: Ceratiola, Corema, Empetrum. (425) Family. (431) Code
used for graphics files: ememni.


Ericaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Heath family. (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (400) Dahlgren's Order 1 1. Ericales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Ericales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Ericanae. (418) Takhtajan's
Order Ericales. (421) 1350 species. (422) 100 genera. (423) Genera in study
region: Arctostaphylos, Cassiope, Ledum, Loiseleuria, Rhododendron, Vaccinium.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (428) 220-250 records. (431)
Code used for graphics files: er.


Arctostaphylos alpina <(L.) Spreng.>

      (1) Alpine Bear Berry. (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (8) Arbutus
alpina L. Arctous alpina (L.) Niedenzu Mairania alpina (L.) Desv. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (428) Possibly 20 southern arctic records. (431)
Code used for graphics files: eraral.


Arctostaphylos rubra <(Rehd. & Wils.) Fern.>

      (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (8) Arctostaphylos alpina (L.) Spreng.
subsp. rubra (Rehd. & Wilson) Hultén alpina (L.) Spreng. var. rubra (Rehd. &
Wilson) Bean Arctous erythrocarpa Small Arctous rubra (Rehd. & Wilson) Nakai.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Record from near Nikko Island. (431)
Code used for graphics files: erarru.


Cassiope hypnoides <(L.) D. Don>

      (1) Moss Heather. (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (8) =Harrimanella
hypnoides (L.) Coville. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used
for graphics files: ercate.


Cassiope tetragona <(L.)D. Don>

      (1) Arctic White Heather. (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (8) Var.
saximontana (Small ) C.L. Hitchc. var. tetragona. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: ercate.


Harrimanella hypnoides (L.) Coville

      (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (8) Cassiope hypnoides (L.) D. Don.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
erhahy.


Ledum decumbens <(Ait.) Lodd.>

      (1) Labrador tea. (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (8) =Palustre subsp.
decumbens (Ait.) Lodd. ex Steud. . (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: erlede.


Ledum palustre subsp. decumbens (Ait.) Lodd. ex Steud.

      (1) Labrador tea. (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (8) Ledum decumbens
(Ait.) Lodd. ex Sedu. Ledum palustre var. decumbens Ait. Rhododendron
tomentosum (Stokes) Harmaja subsp. subarcticum (Harmaja) G. Wallace. (9)
Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 10-20(-30) cm high. (12) Plants shrubs <much
branches>. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot
absent. (32) Stems decumbent <and ascending>. (36) Stems glabrous <old stems>,
or sparsely hairy <new growth>. (52) Stipules present <easily overlooked in
new growth>. (53) Stipules not sheathing. (54) Stipules brown. (55) Stipules
scale-like or rudimentary. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 1-2 mm long.
(82) Leaves evergreen <?>. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84)
Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88)
Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 0.6-1.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 1-2 mm wide. (93)
Leaf blades linear. (97) Leaf blades leathery. (105) Leaf blades glabrous
<upper surface>, or hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs on the abaxial. (118)
Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched <check 4, dense and tangled like the soft
side of velcro>. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (125) Leaf bases
attenuate. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices rounded. (134)
Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136)
Flowering stems hairy <densely so>. (145) Flowering stem (0.5-)1-2 cm long.
(146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences
<of individual flowers>. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence
fasciculate <loosely>. (159) Inflorescence without bulbils. (160)
Inflorescence 0 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 5-15(-20). (193)
Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length <individual flowers, the
cluster of flowers 1-2.5 cm across>. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals green, or
brown. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 5.
(267) Petals free. (268) Petals white. (269) Petals without contrasting
markings. (270) Petals obovate. (272) Petals 2-3 mm long. (273) Petals not
spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (276) Corolla cup-like. (277)
Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length.
(280) Stamens free of the corolla <fused to the corolla??>. (293) Carpels
syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (296) Ovary superior. (307) Styles
present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (313) Stigmas per
style 5 <each one forked>. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 15-20. (325)
Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit spherical. (327) Fruit 2-3.5 mm long. (328) Fruit
1-3.5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent <dehiscing from the base
of the fruit>. (332) Fruit brown. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds 75-100 <?>. (357) Seeds
<mature seeeds looked for among museum specimens but not found>. (360) 2n =
52. (364) Circumpolar <almost, E. Asia, Alaska to W. Greenland, low arctic to
sub-arctic>. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Uncommon <but common where it occurs>. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin. (373) Substrate type: acidic. (374) Moist areas. (380) Moss-lichen
heath on sunny cliffs and ledges Porsild (1957). Common in most parts of the
south; local towards the northern limit of its range. It grows cheifly in dry,
places that are covered by snow in winter but not drifted over so deeply that
its last emlting marked reduces the growing season. It is characteristic of
the sides of mounds and the upper levels of the banks of streams. Sometimes it
is dominant over considerble areas and often found adjacent to marshes. (384)
Polunin (1940) stated that Labrador Tea varies little within the Arctic
Archipelago except in luxuriance, the plants generally being prostrate and
having small leaves, but sometimes ascending to 20 cm with stems 0.6 cm thick
and much broader leaves. The plant seems always to flower and generally to set
fruit in abundance, even in its most northerly localities. Whether or not the
species regularly sets seed has not been established from specimens in the
herbarium at the Canadian Museum of Nature. (385) Treated as a species by
Porsild (1957) but as Lendum palustre var. decumbens Ait. by Polunin (1940).
Possibly 20 Southern Baffin Island records. (431) Code used for graphics
files: erlepa.


Loiseleuria procumbens <(L.) Desv.>

      (1) Alpine Azalea. (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (8) Azalea procumbens
L. Chamaecisus procumbens (L.) Kuntze . (424) Morphological data not coded.
(428) Possibly 10 southern Baffin records. (431) Code used for graphics files:
erlopr.


Phyllodoce caerulea <(L.) Bab.>

      (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (8) No synonymy in Kartesz (1994),.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Possibly 10 southern Baffin Island
records. (431) Code used for graphics files: erphco.


Rhododendron lapponicum <(L.) Wahl.>

      (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (8) Var. lapponicum There is a second
var. parvifolium (M.F. Adams) Herder Katesz (1994). (424) Morphological data
not coded. (428) Possibly 10 Arctic island records. (431) Code used for
graphics files: errhla.


Vaccinium uliginosum <L.>

      (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (8) Vaccinium occidentale Gray Vaccinium
uliginosum subsp. alpinium (Bigelow) Hultén Vaccinium uliginosum subsp.
gaultheroides (Bigelow) S.B. Young Vaccinium uliginosum subsp. microphyllum
Lange Vaccinium uliginosum subsp. occidentalie (Gray) Hultén Vaccinium
uliginosum subsp. pedris (Harshberger) S.B. Young Vaccinium uliginosum var.
alpinum Bigelow Vaccinium uliginosum var. occidentale (Gray) Hara Vaccinium
uliginosum var. salicium (Cham.) Hultén. (424) Morphological data not coded.
(428) Possibly 20-30 records. (431) Code used for graphics files: ervaul.


Vaccinium vitis-idaea <L.> subsp. minus <(Lodd.) Hultén>

      (2) Ericaceae, bilberry family. (8) Vaccinium vitis-idaea L. var. minus
Lodd. Hultén Vaccinium vitis-idaea L. var. punctatum Moench . (424)
Morphological data not coded. (428) Possibly 15 records. (431) Code used for
graphics files: ervavi.


Fabaceae <Lindley>

      (1) Pea family. (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (14) Plants
perennial herbs <ours>. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect <usually>. (52)
Stipules present. (53) Stipules sheathing, or not sheathing. (84) Leaves
alternate. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves 5-100 cm long. (90) Leaves 7-60
mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate <except in Lupinus>. (99) Leaflets (3-)7-33.
(119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136)
Flowering stems hairy <usually>. (149) Flowers in inflorescences <usually>.
(151) Inflorescence racemose <or appearing spicate by reduction or supression
of petioles, rarely with a single flower>. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm
in diameter or length, or large, greater than 15 mm in diameter or length.
(196) Flowers zygomorphic. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (259) Sepals
hairy. (263) Calyx tubular <usually>. (264) Calyx 5-lobed <usually>. (266)
Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and fused. (269) Petals with contrasting
markings <colour gradation and insect guide lines>. (271) Petals unlobed <four
petals>, or 2-lobed <banner petal>. (276) Corolla papilionaceous <the largest
and uppermost petal, called the banner, is bilobed, the two lateral ones that
are similar, are called wings, and below and partly enclosed by them is the
keel, formed by two united, petals>. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free <or
almost free, 1 stamen>, or fused <9 stamens fused into an open tube>. (293)
Carpels monomerous. (296) Ovary superior. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316)
Placentation axile <marginal>. (317) Ovules 2-30. (325) Fruit a legume <or
pod, that is varously shaped>. (326) Fruit ovoid, or elongate-cylindrical.
(327) Fruit 5-40 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-9 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331)
Fruit dehiscent. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting
<usually, thread-like at the tip of the legumes>, or styles not persistent.
(356) Seeds 1-25. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 16, 32,
48, and 96. (384) Key from Porsild (1964). 1. Leaves palmate..... Lupinus 1.
Leaves pinnate 2. Legumes subcylindric, dehiscent 3. Keel of corolla blunt,
without appendage at tip... Astragalus 3. Keel of corolla tipped with an erect
point... ..Oxytropis 2. Legumes flat, indehiscent, composed of several
articulate sections.... Hedysarum. (385) Represented in our area by
Astragulas, 3 species, Hedysarum, 2 species, Lupinus arcticus L., and
Oyxtropis 8 species. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Fabiflorae. (395) Dahlgren's Order 1 1. Fabales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass
Rosidae. (411) Cronquist's Order Fabales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae.
(414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Fabales. (421)
12000 species. (422) 650 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Astragalus,
Hedysarum, Lupinus, Oxytropis. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics
files: fa.


Astragalus <L.>

      (1) Milk vetch. (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (11) Plants 2-30
cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed <rarely>, or
tufted <usually>. (18) Taproot present. (52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules
sheathing. (58) Petioles 5-35 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves 1.5-5.5 cm
long. (90) Leaves 8-25 mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets 7-23. (100)
Leaflets 3-12 mm long. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (136) Flowering
stems hairy. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (193)
Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (196) Flowers
zygomorphic. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (258) Sepals brown. (259)
Sepals hairy. (264) Calyx 5-lobed. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and
fused. (268) Petals green, or white, or purple, or blue. (269) Petals with
contrasting markings. (272) Petals 6-15 mm long. (274) Petals longer than the
calyx. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (296) Ovary superior. (317)
Ovules 3-12. (325) Fruit a legume. (326) Fruit ellipsoid, or ovoid, or
distinctly flat. (327) Fruit 5-20 mm long. (328) Fruit 2.5-6 mm wide. (330)
Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit black, or brown. (356) Seeds
3-12. (357) Seeds 1-2 mm long. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 16 and 48. (384)
The name Astragalus is from the Greek for ankle-bone, used in ancient times as
a form of dice. It has been supposed that word was applied to the plant,
because of the rattle of seeds within the dry pods of some species. (385) A
genus represented by 3 species. (425) Genus. (431) Code used for graphics
files: faas.


Astragalus alpinus <L.>

      (1) Alpine milk-vetch. (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (4) Sp.
Pl.760. 1753. Holotype labelled “Astraglus alpinus Lapp.”, LINN. Astragalus
alpinus subsp. alaskanus Hultén Astragalus alpinus subsp. arcticus Astragalus
astragalinus (Hook.) A. & D. Löve Atelophhrgma alpinum (L.) Rydb. For complete
synonymy see Barnaby (1964). (8) Astragalus alpinus subsp. alaskanun Hultén
Astragalus alpinus subsp. arcticus Hultén Astragalus astragalinus (Hook.) A. &
D. Löve Atelophragma alpinum (L.) Rydb. (11) Plants 2-25 cm high <low and
matted>. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed <small high
arctic plants>, or tufted <larger plants that have many stems arising from a
compact stem zone (caudex) at the top of the tap root>. (18) Taproot present.
(32) Stems erect <small plants>, or decumbent <larger plants with creeping
freely branched weak stems>. (36) Stems glabrous <leaf petioles sparsely
hairy>. (52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules sheathing <margins overlapping so
that stipules may appear to be fused>. (54) Stipules brown, or green. (55)
Stipules scale-like or rudimentary <with age>, or leaf-like <when young>. (58)
Petioles 5-35 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (84) Leaves alternate <larger
plants>, or opposite <semi-opposite on compact plants>. (87) Leaves compound.
(89) Leaves 1.5-5.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 8-20 mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate.
(99) Leaflets 9-23. (100) Leaflets 3-12 mm long. (102) Leaflets oblong, or
elliptic, or lanceolate <broadly>. (105) Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades
with hairs equally dense on both surfaces. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate.
(135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (145)
Flowering stem 4.5-10 cm long <axillary and longer than the leaf petioles>.
(151) Inflorescence racemose. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-1.5 cm long <not
etiolating as the fruit matures>. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 3-9(-11).
(193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (196) Flowers
zygomorphic. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (258) Sepals brown <or
appearing black from hairs on the surface>. (259) Sepals hairy. (263) Calyx
tubular. (264) Calyx 5-lobed. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and
fused. (268) Petals purple, or blue. (269) Petals with contrasting markings
<without any appendages>. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed <4
petals>, or 2-lobed <banner petal>. (272) Petals 6-10 mm long. (274) Petals
longer than the calyx. (276) Corolla papilionaceous. (277) Stamens 10. (278)
Stamens free <or almost free, 1 stamen>, or fused <9 stamens in an open tube>.
(279) Stamens filament all equal in length <or slightly unequal>. (293)
Carpels monomerous. (296) Ovary superior. (313) Stigmas per style 1 <not
conspicuous>. (316) Placentation axile <marginal>. (317) Ovules 5-10. (325)
Fruit a legume <each on a short stalk and hanging downwards; they are hirsute
when fresh and dry yellowish>. (326) Fruit distinctly flat <sometimes
ulu-shaped in outline especially when pressed.>. (327) Fruit (5-)6-10(-12) mm
long <more than 10 mm long when fully mature, and in this character distinct
from A. eucosmus>. (328) Fruit 2.5-4 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown <pale and yellowish>. (333) Fruit hairy <with
obvious black or brown hairs>. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit
styles persisting <thread-like at the end of the beaked legumes>, or styles
not persistent. (356) Seeds 3-5(-8). (357) Seeds 1-2 mm long. (358) Seeds
<yellowish>. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 16. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low
arctic. (366) <Polunin (1940) noted that this species had not been recorded
north of Lancaster Sound. He considered it common in the south and frequent
again in northern Baffin>. (367) Common <CHECK>. (373) Substrate type: acidic.
(374) Moist areas <that are rather dry and exposed, sandy or gravelly. This
species may be locally abundant and form large mats. It often occurs with
grasses as a colonizing species>. (380) This species flowers and fruits
profusely and usually produces numerous root nodules. (381) This is a
phenotypically plastic taxon that is able to occupy a variety of habitats. The
size of the plants is an indication of the exposure, water and mineral
availability of a site. In adverse conditions plants are only 5 cm tall, in
favourable conditions they may be 15-25 cm tall. The northernmost record is
from Lichutin Island, approx. 76°N in Novaya Zmelya, Russia. In North America
the range extends from Alaska south to the mountains of New Mexico with
extensions eastwards to the Canadian Arctic Islands, across the northern
portion of the prairie provinces to James Bay, northern Quebec and Labrador,
southern Quebec and New Brunswick to Newfoundland. 389Polunin (1964) noted
that the little “Alpine Milk Vetch varies considerably in robustness and
general appearance; also varies in the colour of the flowers and the size,
shape and hairiness of the leaflets”. Barnaby (1964) recognized this species
as being in the Phacoid Phalanx, sect. Astragalus. He stated that “the alpine
milk vetch is the most widely dispersed of all astagali, yet when due
allowance has been made for the diversity of soils, climates and environments
to which it has become adapted, it is a comparatively little variable species.
Throughout a vast spatial and altitudinal range of disperal the pod remains
essentially uniform with a comprehensible (and in the context of the genus
expectable) span of variation in length, width, and curvature. The principal
segregates from A. alpinus distinguished in the past have been characterized
by slight differences in size, colouring and relative lengths of the petals
...”. Barnaby (1964) recongized two varieties as occuring in North America.
The arctic plants are A. alpinus var. alpinus. A second variety, Astragalus
alpinus var. brunetianus, occurs on river and lake shores in New England,
Newfoundland, and s.e. Quebec. Another variant of A. alpinus, ... confined to
the highest latitudes around the pole, has been described as A. arcticus
Bunge. It was maintained by Gontscharov, as a distinct species under the
epithet, subpolaris, and recognized by Hultén (1941) as a subspecies
coordinate with subsp. alaskanus. Bunge distinguished it from A. alpinus
because of its regularly graduated, more richly coloured petals, supposedly
correlated with a more robust habit of growth. Gonstscharov (??) brought out a
further contrast between a fully bilocular pod in A. alpinus and a
semibilocular one in A. subpolaris. Barnaby (1964) stated that he had seen
about forty collections (over thirty from North America) that would be
referred to A. subpolaris because the wings surpass the kell in length. By no
means all of these have bright purple flowers, and at least in America a
flower of this type is not correlated with a relatively narrow septum. In
Alaska, the plants most closely resembling A. arcticus of Novaya Zemlya and
Northern Lapland are found chiefly along the north coast eastwood from Behring
Strait, but technically inseparable forms occur in the interior up to 3500
feet elevation. Hultén’s (1944, no.813b) map shows correctly that the subsp.
arcticus and alpinus are sympatric even at their northernmost limits, but
leaves out the many puzzling specimens which fail to satisfy the criteria of
proportions and coloring of the petals and cannot be considered typic of
either subspecies.... The differential characters are quite feebly correlated,
and it seems preferable to regard A. arcticus as a minor variant.Barneby
(1964), who we follow, found no reason to recognize variants such A. arcticus
Bunge or A. subpolaris Gontascharov. (385) This is a relatively undisputed
species, that in the Canadian Arctic is represented by var. alpinus. A second
variety, var. Brunetianus occurs in New England, Newfoundland, and S.E.
Quebec. In North America the range extends from Alaska south to the mountains
of New Mexicoa with extensions eastwards to the Canadian Arctic Islands,
across the northern portion of the prairie provinces to James Bay, northern
Quebec and Labrador, southern Quebec and New Brunswick to Newfoundland.
Barneby (1964) whom we follow here, recognized two varieties, var. alpinus and
var. brunetianus Fern. which occurs in Quebec and Newfoundland. Because of its
plasticity and innumerable local populations, a number of species and
subspecies have been proposed. However, Barneby (1964) found no reason to
recognize variants such A. arcticus Bunge or A. subpolaris Gontascharov. (431)
Code used for graphics files: faasal.


Astragalus australis <(L.) Lam.>

      (1) Richardsons milk vetch, indian milk vetch, aboringium of the Cree
and Stone Indians, who gathered the root as a spring vegetable. (2) Fabaceae
(Leguminosae), pea family. (4) In Frankl. Jour. Append. 746. 1823. (6) Type:
Type: Canada: above Prince Albert, on the North Saskatchewan River. Sandy
plains in the neighbourhood of Carlton. Presumed holotype labeled N. America,
1819-22, Richardson, BM. (8) A. aboroingium Richards In Frankl. Jour. Append.
746. 1823. A. richardsonii Sheldon, Minn. Bot. Stud. 1: 126. 1894, a new name
for A. vaginatus (sheathing of the stipules) sensu Richard. ex Hook. Fl.
Bor.-Amer. 1:149.1831 (non Pallas, 1800, tab. 36. No holotype identified as
such. Astragalus aboringium var. glabriusculus (Hok.) Rydb. Astragalus
aboringium var. lepagei (Hultén) Boivin Astragalus aboringium var.
richardsonii (Sheldon) Boivin Astragalus australis var. glabriusculus (Hook.)
Isely Astragalus australis var. major (Gray) Isely Astragalus forwoodii S.
Wats. Astragalus forwoodii var.wallowensis (Rydb.) M.E. Peck Astragalus
glabriusculus (Hook.) var. major Gray Astragalus linearis Rydb. Porsild
Astragalus scrupulicola Fern. & Weatherby Atelophragma aboriginorum (Richards)
Rybd. For further synonymy see Barneby (1964) under the name A. aboringium.
(11) Plants 10-25 cm high <coarse>. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
tufted <with many stems arising from a compact stem zone “caudex” at the top
of the tap root>. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems densely
hairy. (52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules sheathing <margins overlapping
around the stem>. (54) Stipules brown, or green <covered with black hairs>.
(55) Stipules scale-like or rudimentary <with age>, or leaf-like <when young>.
(58) Petioles 5-20 mm long <slender>. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate <sometimes almost opposite
in smaller plants>. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves (2.5-)3-4 cm long. (90)
Leaves 10-20 mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets 7-15. (100) Leaflets
4-7 mm long <-10>. (102) Leaflets linear and lanceolate. (105) Leaf blades
hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both surfaces <ash-grey
and very dense “tomentose”>. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate <midvein
prominent, other veins obscure>. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136)
Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 1.5-8 cm long. (151) Inflorescence
racemose. (160) Inflorescence 1.5-9 cm long <elongating as the legumes
mature>. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 7-15. (193) Flowers medium-sized,
5-15 mm in diameter or length <without scent>. (196) Flowers zygomorphic.
(254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (258) Sepals brown
<or black>. (259) Sepals hairy <densely so>. (263) Calyx tubular, or
funnel-form. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and fused. (268) Petals
green, or white, or purple <banner and wing petals white or pale pink with
prominent green veins, tips of the keel petals purplish, without any
appendage>. (269) Petals with contrasting markings <a blot of colour on the
tip of the keel>. (270) Petals oblanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed <four
petals>, or 2-lobed <banner petal, wing petals toothed>. (272) Petals 10-15 mm
long <usually longer than plants of this species growing south of 60°N>. (274)
Petals longer than the calyx. (276) Corolla papilionaceous. (277) Stamens 10.
(278) Stamens free <1 stamen>, or fused <9 stamens, in an open sheath>. (279)
Stamens filament all equal in length <or slightly unequal>. (293) Carpels
monomerous. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 1. (313) Stigmas per style 1
<not conspicuous>. (316) Placentation axile <marginal>. (317) Ovules 3-12.
(325) Fruit a legume. (326) Fruit ellipsoid and distinctly flat <more or less
inflated, borne on a stalk that is as long or almost twice as long as the
calyx. Legumes become dark wine red, and somewhat translucent when mature>.
(327) Fruit 10-20 mm long. (328) Fruit 3.5-6 mm wide <t°10 mm wide when
pressed; pods from southern plants usually 3.5-6 mm wide>. (330) Fruit dry.
(331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown <pale yellowish>. (333) Fruit
glabrous <even when young>. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting <usually as a narrow thread>. (356) Seeds 3-12. (357) Seeds 1.5-2
mm long <longest dimension>. (358) Seeds brown <pale and yellowish>. (359)
Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 48. (364) Amphi-Beringian <endemic to the northern
Mackenzie District and the western arctic islands>. (366) Of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (371) Arctic Islands: Banks and Victoria.
(373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Sand <and gravelly substrates>. (382)
The root was gathered as a spring vegetable by Cree and Stone Indians (Barneby
1964). (384) Barneby (1964) recongnized this species as being in the Phacoid
Phalanx, Sect. Hemiphragmum. Porsild (1964) identified the Arctic taxon as A.
richardsonii Sheldon and indicated the species is closely related to the
prairie species A. aboriginorum Richards, from which it differs in having
large flowers, glabrous legumes and more densely tormentose leaves. Barneby
(1964) stated that “because of the variations in stature, vestiture, and
amplitude of the foliage, the Indian milk-vetch, A. aboringinum, cannot be
characterized in a few succinct words”. He placed A. richardsonii in synonymy
under A. aboringium. Leading features are the large, veiny, obtuse stipules at
base of the stems and the toothed wing petals... The nodding flowers vary
somewhat in size but hardly at all in shape or relative proportions of the
parts; they are usually conspicuously bicoloured on account of the blot on the
keel-tip, which often becomes more intensely coloured when dry. There is a
wide range of variation in length and orientation of the stems, much of it
clearly correlated with accidents of habitat and exposure. The pod is almost
uniformly half-elliptic in profile with a nearly straight dorsal and convexly
arched ventral suture, so that it appears to be arched a little downward. Its
stipe varies from about as long to over twice as long as the tube of the
calyx, and the body varies in width from 3.5 to 6 mm or in the far Northwest
up to 9 mm in diameter. Nevertheless the flowers and fruits of the Indian
milk-vetch are everywhere so much alike in fine detail that it seems certain
we are dealing with only one specific type, however variable its component
part may be in other features. The Indian milk-vetch (with its close relative
A. cottoni) is isolated in our flora, but has several close kindred in
Eurasia, notably A. australis (L.) Lam. Polunin (1959) has treated the latter
and at least the boreal manifestations of A. aboringinum as forming an
aggregate species, and there is much to be said in favor of this view. The
problem of specific limits in sect. Hemiphragmium involves however, a whole
complex of forms widely dispersed from the Pyrenees and Carpathians across
northern Asia to Mongolia and Siberia and a number of supposed segregates such
as A. tugarinovii Basilevsk.,... there is no alternative but to postpone study
of this and attendant nomenclatural questions and limit the field of inquiry
to what much be called A. aboringium in America. A discussion of our plants
may be divided profitably into two parts, one dealing with the Indian
milk-vetches of the Rocky Mountains and southern Canada generally, one with
the Arctic and Alaskan types. The Arctic and subarctic races of A. aboriginum
introduce three new features, petioled stem leaves, larger flowers, and
broader pods than found in the Rocky Mountains. In the northern specimens the
leaves are often slender petioled and the flowers are occasionally much
larger, with banner up to 14.5 mm long. As in the more southern area, the pod
is much more often glabrous, than strigulose, but it is more variable in size,
sometimes reaching a width of 6-9 (as opposed to an average 3.5-6) mm., and
furthermore it is sometimes less strongly compressed and incipiently bladdery.
Several pubescent types occur in the Northwest, but none seem to be correlated
with shape of leaflets or with size of the flower-parts, or fruits. In the
upper Yukon Valley, the leaflets are prevailingly linear or nearly so, but the
leaves vary from sessile to petiolate. Above the Arctic Circle, the leaflets
are usually of a broad type, and the leaves are most often petioled, but
neither of these characters is more than dominant in any region which might
reasonably be expected to harbour a distinct or endemic race. Three types
fully intergradient, but at the extreme point of development easily
recognized, can be made out of the material from Alaska, Yukon, and Mackenzie
District.... The type locality of A. richardsonii in “woody country between
54° and 64°” also suggests on of the more southern Canadian rather than one of
the tundra phases of the Indian milk-vetch. The Beringian variant of A.
aboringium scarcely differs from some European and Asiatic material of A.
australis. It was apparently included by Gontscharov (1946, p. 66) in his
concept of an arctic-alpine A. australis widely dispersed across northern
Eurasia. (For further information on the North American variants see Barneby
1964, p. 141-142). (385) Barneby (1964) postponed a decision to take up the
name of a Eurasian species for this plant because of a lack of authentic
material and the need to study each of the several species that applied to
this aggregate species. Subsequently several authors have used the earlier
name A. australis in lieu of his A. aboriginum Richards. It seems appropriate
to emply it here. Porsild (1964) used the name A. richardsonii Sheldon (A.
aboringium auctt., pro parte) explaining that it had larger flowers, glabrous
legumes and more densely tormentose leaves than true A. aboringum. Polunin
(1940) did not include the species as his flora covered only the Canadian
Eastern Arctic and this species does not occur in the east. (431) Code used
for graphics files: faasau.


Astragalus eucosmus <B.L. Robbins>

      (1) Elegant milk-vetch. (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (4)
Rhodora 10:33. 1908, based on A. oroboides var. americanus Gray, Proc. Amer.
Acad. 6: 204. 1844. (non A. americanus (Hook.) Jones 1898. Type: Canada:
“prairies of the Rocky Mountains ... Drummond”. Holotype. K. (8) Astragalus
eucosmus subsp. sealei (Lepage) Hultén Astragalus eucosmus var. facinorum
Fern. Astragalus parviflorus (Pursh) MacM. Astragalus sealei Lepage
Atelophragma elegans (Hook.)Rydb. (11) Plants 10-30 cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a caudex. (18)
Taproot present. (32) Stems decumbent <to ascending slender branches>. (36)
Stems glabrous <older stems>, or sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules present. (53)
Stipules sheathing. (54) Stipules brown, or green. (55) Stipules scale-like or
rudimentary <with age>, or leaf-like <younger leaves>. (58) Petioles 5-20 mm
long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84)
Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves 2.5-4 cm long. (90) Leaves
15-25 mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets 8-17. (100) Leaflets 5-12 mm
long. (102) Leaflets linear, or oblong. (105) Leaf blades glabrous, or hairy
<seen at 10X on the upper surface, the lower surface densely hairy, with white
or black hairs>. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate <lateral veins often
obscure>. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy
<hairs black, transparent, or black with transparent tips>. (145) Flowering
stem 5-8 cm long. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (160) Inflorescence 1.5-5 cm
long <dense in bud but soon elongating>. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 6-16.
(193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (196) Flowers
zygomorphic. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (258) Sepals brown <or
black>. (259) Sepals hairy <densely>. (263) Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx
5-lobed. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and fused. (268) Petals purple
<dark>. (269) Petals with contrasting markings <veins prominent>. (270) Petals
obovate. (271) Petals unlobed <4 petals>, or 2-lobed <banner petal>. (272)
Petals 6.5-7.5 mm long. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (276) Corolla
papilionaceous. (278) Stamens free <almost free, 1 stamen>, or fused <9
stamens fused in an open tube>. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length
<slightly unequal>. (293) Carpels monomerous <stipitate>. (296) Ovary
superior. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation axile <marginal>.
(317) Ovules 3-8. (325) Fruit a legume <pendulous>. (326) Fruit ovoid <or
cuneate after pressing; not inflated, sessile within the calyx>. (327) Fruit
6-12 mm long. (328) Fruit 3.5-4.5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit black, or brown <densely hairy>. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds 3-8. (357) Seeds 1-2 mm
long <wider than long>. (358) Seeds <yellowish>. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n
= 32. (364) North American. (365) Low arctic <and apparently limited to the
eastern half of the extreme south, being widespread in Quebec>. (367) Rare
<known from Baffin Island; Apex, Iqaluit, and Lake Harbour>. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin. (373) Substrate type: calcareous <growing in sand, gravel,
and with grasses at Iqaluit; plants growing as a sand binder on the beach at
Apex, In continental North America plants of this species often grow among
willows on sand and gravel bars in rivers and by sheltered lake shores>. (380)
Plants flower and fruit abundantly. (381) Plants vary in height from 10 cm
tall in severe environments to 30 cm tall under ideal growing condtions. The
northernmost record that Polunin (1940) found was Great Bear Lake approx.
66°N. (384) Barneby (1964) recognized this taxon as being in the PHACOID
PHALANX, sect. Oroboidei. Barneby (1964) stated that the elegant milk-vetch,
A. eucosmus, is closely related to A. robbinsii different chiefly in the
sessile pod. The leaflets tend to be narrower and the flowers are often
smaller, but neighter of these features is diagnostic of A. eucosmus and
fruits at least half formed are often necessary for identification. Despite
its great range, A. eucosmus is only moderately variable, much less so than a
glance at the synonymy might suggest. Normally an erect plant of moderate
stature, it is susceptible to drawfing in open montane and far northern
environments, where the stems become diffuse or weakly ascending as well as
shorter, and the raceme tends to become shorter and more compact in fruit. ...
The raceme of A. eucosmus ordinarily elongates rapidly during anthesis, the
axis becoming about 3.5-19 mm long in fruit with pods well spaced along its
length. Instances of shortening ... are correlated with short diffuse stems
and an unfavourable habitat, mostly on exposed seashores at high latitudes in
eastern Canada and Baffin. (385) Porsild (1964) used this name. Barneby (1964)
indicated that this species is closely related to A. robbinsii Oakes) Gray.
(431) Code used for graphics files: faaseu.


Astragalus richardsonii <Sheldon>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) =Astagalus australis. (385)
Name used by Porsild (1964) that is here treated under A. australis (L.) Lam.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
faasri.


Hedysarum <L.>

      (1) Liquorice-root, Eskimo potato. (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea
family. (11) Plants 10-40 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs <with
odd-pinnate leaves>. (15) Plants tufted. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems
erect. (52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules sheathing. (54) Stipules brown.
(55) Stipules scale-like or rudimentary. (58) Petioles 5-25 mm long. (83)
Leaves distributed along the stems. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves 2-10 cm
long. (90) Leaves 10-60 mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets 5-13.
(100) Leaflets 5-40 mm long. (105) Leaf blades glabrous, or hairy. (119) Leaf
blade venation pinnate. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering
stems hairy, or glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 5-20 cm long <arching or
straight>. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (160) Inflorescence 2-8 cm long.
(192) Flowers per inflorescence 5-15. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in
diameter or length, or large, greater than 15 mm in diameter or length. (255)
Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (263) Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx 5-lobed. (266)
Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and fused. (268) Petals pink, or purple.
(269) Petals with contrasting markings <without an appendage on the keel>.
(272) Petals 10-25 mm long. (277) Stamens 10. (293) Carpels monomerous. (296)
Ovary superior. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (317) Ovules 2-6. (326) Fruit
distinctly flat <and composed of readily separated and roundish 1-seeded
sections called “loments”>. (327) Fruit 20-40 mm long. (328) Fruit 4-8 mm
wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent <splitting between the
loments>. (332) Fruit yellowish, or brown. (356) Seeds 1-6. (357) Seeds 1.5-3
mm long. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 14, or 28. (385) A genus represented
by 2 species. (425) Genus. (431) Code used for graphics files: fahe.


Hedysarum alpinum var. alpinum <L.>

      (1) Liquorice-root. (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) No
synonymy for var. alpinium in Kartesz (1994). Other varieites recognized, e.g.
Hedysarum alpinum var. americanum Michx. Hedysarum alpinum subsp. americanum
(Michx.) Fedtsch. . (11) Plants (10-)15-25 cm high <to 60 cm high further
south, e.g. in the Mackenzie Delta>. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
tufted <with a few stems that arise from compact stem zones “caudices” that
are scaly>. (18) Taproot present <large and fleshy>. (32) Stems erect. (36)
Stems <not visible>. (52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules sheathing. (54)
Stipules brown <scale-like>. (58) Petioles 10-25 mm long. (82) Leaves
deciduous. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate
<sometimes almost opposite near the inflorescences>. (87) Leaves compound.
(89) Leaves 3.5-8(-10) cm long. (90) Leaves 20-40(-60) mm wide. (98) Leaves
pinnate. (99) Leaflets (7-)9-13. (100) Leaflets 10-20(-40) mm long. (102)
Leaflets ovate, or lanceolate. (105) Leaf blades glabrous <to the naked eye>,
or hairy <with a few fine hairs at the midrib that are seen at 10X,
particularly on the lower surface>. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (135)
Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy <with fine white
hairs seen at 10X>, or glabrous <to the naked eye>. (145) Flowering stem
5-10(-13) cm long <straight>. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (160)
Inflorescence 3-6 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 10-15. (193)
Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (196) Flowers
zygomorphic. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (258) Sepals green, or brown
<darker on the triangular shaped tips of the sepals; “calyx teeth deltoid”
Porsild, 1964>. (259) Sepals hairy. (263) Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx 5-lobed.
(266) Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and fused. (268) Petals pink, or purple
<pale>. (269) Petals with contrasting markings <colour gradation darkest on
the tips of the petals, pale towards the base; no appendage on the keel>.
(270) Petals oblanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed <four petals>, or 2-lobed
<banner petal>. (272) Petals 10-20 mm long. (276) Corolla papilionaceous.
(277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free <1 stamen free or almost free>, or fused
<9 stamens fused in an open tube>. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length
<almost equal>. (293) Carpels monomerous. (296) Ovary superior. (313) Stigmas
per style 1. (316) Placentation axile <marginal>. (317) Ovules 2-3. (325)
Fruit a legume. (326) Fruit distinctly flat. (327) Fruit 20-30 mm long. (328)
Fruit 4-6 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit
yellowish. (333) Fruit glabrous <with conspicuous net-like veins>. (334) Fruit
calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting <as a short beak at the tip of
the legume>. (356) Seeds 1-3. (357) Seeds 1.5-2(-2.5) mm long. (358) Seeds
brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 14, or 28. (364) Not circumpolar,
amphi-Atlantic, amphi-Beringian, or North American <Asia and America,
arctic-alpine>. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (371) Arctic Islands: Banks, or Victoria. (373) Substrate type:
calcareous. (374) Rocky sites. (380) Sands and gravels on river-banks and by
sheltered lake shores. (381) NEEDS NORTHERNMOST RECORD. (382) The fleshy
roots, which in mature plants may be half an inch thick, are edible and when
cooked taste somewhat like young carrots. The roots are best in August but may
be dug even in the spring. (384) A relatively well defined species that
further south has been distinguished as H. alpinum var. americanum Michx.
Porsild and Cody (1980) commented that “the transitional differences between
the arctic and more temperate plants appear to be quite gradual and to be
merely an expression of climatic differences”. There are currently no Arctic
Island specimens with the fruiting stages collected. The data on fruits is
based on material collected in the continental N.W.T. (385) Porsild (1964)
used this name. Polunin (1940) recognized H. mackenzii var. pabulare based on
two small specimens from Chesterfield Inlet, but this has not been widley
taken up. The species relatively well defined in the Arctic Archipelago.
Further south a second taxon H. alpinum var. americanum Michx. has been
separated from this species. Porsild and Cody (1980) commented that “the
transitional differences between the arctic and more temperate plants appear
to be quite gradual and to be merely an expression of climatic differences”.
(431) Code used for graphics files: faheal.


Hedysarum boreale <Nutt.> subsp. mackenziei <(Richardson) Welsh>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) Hedysarum boreale var.
mackenzie (Richards) C.L. Hitchc. Hedysarum mackenzie Richards. (11) Plants
15-40 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <with numerous
stems. Hedysarum mackenzie var. pabulare (A. Nelson) Polunin>. (18) Taproot
present <thick and fibrous>. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems glabrous. (52)
Stipules present. (53) Stipules sheathing. (54) Stipules brown. (58) Petioles
5-25 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems.
(84) Leaves alternate <rarely>, or opposite. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves
2-8 cm long. (90) Leaves (10-)20-30 mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99)
Leaflets 5-11 <-13>. (100) Leaflets (5-)10-15 mm long. (102) Leaflets linear,
or ovate, or lanceolate. (105) Leaf blades hairy <with fine, slivery grey
hairs>. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both surfaces. (119)
Leaf blade venation pinnate. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136)
Flowering stems hairy <with fine appressed hairs seen at 10X>, or glabrous <in
appearance to the naked eye>. (145) Flowering stem 5-20 cm long <curved to
arching>. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (160) Inflorescence 2-8 cm long. (192)
Flowers per inflorescence 5-15. (193) Flowers large, greater than 15 mm in
diameter or length <showy and sweet scented>. (196) Flowers zygomorphic. (255)
Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (258) Sepals brown <or black with narrow,
pointed tips; “calyx teeth lance or linear sabulate” Porsild, 1964>. (263)
Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx 5-lobed. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and
fused. (268) Petals purple. (269) Petals with contrasting markings <colour
gradation from deep purple at tips of the petals to pale yellowish at the
base>. (270) Petals oblanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed <four petals>, or
2-lobed <banner petal>. (272) Petals 15-25 mm long <to ?35 mm long, Porsild,
1967>. (276) Corolla papilionaceous. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free <1
stamen free or almost free>, or fused <9 stamens fused in an open tube>. (279)
Stamens filament all equal in length <almost>. (293) Carpels monomerous. (296)
Ovary superior. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation axile
<marginal>. (317) Ovules 3-6. (325) Fruit a legume. (326) Fruit distinctly
flat. (327) Fruit 30-40 mm long. (328) Fruit 6-8 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry.
(331) Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit brown <at maturity>. (333) Fruit hairy
<with fine hairs visible at 10X, and conspicuous transverse veins>, or
glabrous <appearing so to the naked eye>. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335)
Fruit styles persisting <as a long thread>, or styles not persistent. (356)
Seeds 3-6. (357) Seeds 2.5-3 mm long <largest dimension>. (358) Seeds brown.
(359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = <14, H. mackenzii s.s; 28, H. mackenzii s.l>.
(374) <Rather dry and gravelly flats, often predominating in dwarf forms>.
(384) Porsild (1964) indicated that plants grow 10-25 cm tall. Plants 40 cm
tall have been collected from N.W.T., southern Banks Island, Nelson Head, 2
mi. n.e., 2 July 1952, T. H. Manning & A. Macpherson 77. CAN 220125. (385)
JACK GILLETT?? suggests that Welsh (?) has a different name for this species.
(431) Code used for graphics files: fahebo.


Lupinus arcticus subsp. arcticus <L.>

      (1) Lupine. (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) Lupinus borealis
Heller Lupinus donnellyensis C.P. Sm. Lupinus gakonensis C.P. Sm. Lupinus
multicaulis C.P. Sm. Lupinus nootkatensis Donn ex Sims var. kiellmannis Stenf.
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. subsp. arcticus (S. Wats.) L. Phillips Lupinus
relictus Hultén Lupinus yukonensis Greene . (11) Plants 10-40(-50) cm high.
(14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (18) Taproot present. (32)
Stems erect. (36) Stems densely hairy. (52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules
not sheathing. (54) Stipules brown <densely hairy>. (58) Petioles 3-15(-22) mm
long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate.
(87) Leaves compound. (98) Leaves trifoliate <dark green>. (99) Leaflets 3-7.
(100) Leaflets 10-60 mm long. (105) Leaf blades glabrous <upper surface>, or
hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs on the abaxial. (119) Leaf blade venation
palmate. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (145)
Flowering stem 2-8 cm long. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (160)
Inflorescence 3-15 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence (5-)10-30. (193)
Flowers large, greater than 15 mm in diameter or length. (196) Flowers
zygomorphic <usually arising between two stipules on the rachis>. (255) Sepals
5 <in two sections>. (256) Sepals fused. (259) Sepals hairy. (261) Sepals
scarious. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and fused. (268) Petals white
<rarely>, or purple, or blue <usually>. (270) Petals obovate <with two petals
forming a keel>. (271) Petals unlobed, or 2-lobed <banner petal>. (272) Petals
10-15 mm long. (276) Corolla papilionaceous. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens
free <or almost free, 1 stamen>, or fused <9 stamens fused in an open tube>.
(293) Carpels monomerous. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 1. (313) Stigmas
per style 1. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 13-15. (325) Fruit a
legume. (326) Fruit ellipsoid <flattened>. (327) Fruit 20-30 mm long. (328)
Fruit 6-9 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent <along both veins,
the two sides (valves) stongly twisting>. (332) Fruit green at maturity <a
dark olive green>. (333) Fruit hairy <with black hairs>. (334) Fruit <or
black>. (335) Fruit styles persisting <thread-like at the end of the legumes>.
(356) Seeds (3-)5-10. (357) Seeds 4-6 mm long. (358) Seeds black <with white
flecks seen at 10X>. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 3 <Alaska and the Yukon>.
(364) North American. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (380) In tundra and grassy alpine slopes.
(385) There have been no nomenclatural disputes about the name of this
species. Subsp. arcticus is the only one extending into the Arctic Islands,
the other two subspecies occurring in southern British Columbia and south into
Washington. In the Arctic Islands the Arctic lupin is confined to well-drained
hummocks on tundra. Further south, near the Arctic Circle, it is found in
forest clearings. Lupinus arcticus is closely related to L. perennis L. (431)
Code used for graphics files: faluar.


Oxytropis <DC>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (11) Plants 1-35 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted, or cushion-like. (18) Taproot
present. (52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules sheathing, or not sheathing
<usually>. (54) Stipules brown, or white, or colourless. (55) Stipules
scale-like or rudimentary. (58) Petioles 5-60 mm long. (82) Leaves evergreen,
or deciduous, or marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems, or
mostly basal <usually>. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous.
(87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves 0.5-9 cm long. (90) Leaves 3-25 mm wide.
(98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets 5-33. (100) Leaflets 2-10 mm long. (105)
Leaf blades glabrous <rarely>, or hairy <usually>. (151) Inflorescence
racemose. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (256)
Sepals fused. (259) Sepals hairy. (263) Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx 5-lobed.
(267) Petals both free and fused. (268) Petals yellow, or orange, or purple,
or blue. (269) Petals with contrasting markings. (272) Petals 7-30 mm long.
(276) Corolla papilionaceous. (277) Stamens 10. (293) Carpels monomerous.
(296) Ovary superior. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation axile
<marginal>. (317) Ovules 13-30. (326) Fruit ellipsoid, or ovoid, or
elongate-cylindrical, or of an unusual shape. (327) Fruit 10-30 mm long. (328)
Fruit 2-10 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit
yellowish, or black, or brown, or green at maturity. (333) Fruit hairy
<usually>, or glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting <usually>, or styles not persistent. (356) Seeds 3-25. (357) Seeds
1-3 mm long. (358) Seeds black, or brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 16,
or 96. (385) A genus represented by 8 species. (425) Genus. (431) Code used
for graphics files: faox.


Oxytropis arctica var. arctica <R.Br.>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (4) Suppl. App. Parry’s 1st Voy.
278. 1824. (7) O. arctica var. subumbellata Gray and O. arctica var.
microphyla Gray, Proc. Amer. Acad. 20:4, 1884, pro parte. O. roaldi sensu
Macoun & Holm, Rept. Can. Arch. Exp. 5A: 17, tab. 8, fig. 2 1921(?) non
Ostenfield. . (8) O. coronaminis Fern. in Rhodora, 30: 151, tab. 175. 1928.
(11) Plants 5-20 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
cushion-like <often forming soft grey cushions 20-30 cm in diameter>. (18)
Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems <not visible; surrounded by
white or yellowish densely hairy leaf bases>. (52) Stipules present. (53)
Stipules sheathing. (54) Stipules white <or pale brown, strongly adnate to the
petiole>. (58) Petioles 5-35 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves
mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves
2-4.5(-6) cm long. (90) Leaves 6-15 mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99)
Leaflets 9-13. (100) Leaflets (4-)6-8(-10) mm long <1.5-3 mm wide>. (102)
Leaflets oblong, or lanceolate. (105) Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades
with hairs on the adaxial <sparsely hairy; becoming smooth with age
(glabrate)>, or with hairs on the abaxial <densely hairy>. (119) Leaf blade
venation pinnate. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems
hairy. (145) Flowering stem 2-10 cm long. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (160)
Inflorescence 0.1-0.5 cm long <flowers arising very close together at the top
of the inflorescence “subumbellate”>. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 3-5.
(193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length <sweetly perfumed
when fresh>. (196) Flowers zygomorphic. (255) Sepals 5 <10-15 mm long>. (256)
Sepals fused <about half the length of the tube>. (258) Sepals brown, or of an
unusual colour <black>. (259) Sepals hairy <teeth spathulate>. (263) Calyx
tubular. (264) Calyx 5-lobed. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and
fused. (268) Petals purple <vivid in young petals>, or blue <in drying>. (269)
Petals with contrasting markings <colour gradation from deep colour on the
tips, to pale at the base of petals; prominent veins on banner petal acting as
guide lines>. (271) Petals unlobed <four petals>, or 2-lobed <banner petal>.
(272) Petals 20-30 mm long. (276) Corolla papilionaceous. (277) Stamens 10.
(278) Stamens free <or almost free, 1 stamen>, or fused <9 stamens fused in an
open tube>. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length <slightly unequal>.
(293) Carpels monomerous. (308) Styles free. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316)
Placentation axile <marginal>. (317) Ovules 10-15. (325) Fruit a legume. (326)
Fruit oblong <shaped like a wide ulu. The legumes stalked within the calyx>.
(327) Fruit 20-25 mm long. (328) Fruit 6-9 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331)
Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit green at maturity <a dark olive green>. (333)
Fruit hairy <with black hairs>. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit
styles persisting <thread-like on the ends of the legumes>. (356) Seeds
3-20(-25). (357) Seeds 2.5-3 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth.
(360) 2n = 96. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common <Western Arctic>. (371) Arctic Islands: Parry Islands
<Melville, Prince Patrick>, or Banks, or Victoria. (373) Substrate type:
calcareous. (374) Rocky sites, or sand <dry open flat tundra>. (384) Porsild
(1943) stated: “Of the numerous critical species of plants in the flora of
boreal and arctic North America, most of the members of the genus Oxytropis,
as shown by Fernald (1928), have been much misunderstood by earlier writers.
Hooker (1834) clearly did not understand the genus, nor did John Macoun in his
catalogue of Canadian Plants, nor in more recent times J.M. Macoun and
Theordore Holm (1921). In addition to taxonomic difficulties the genus offers
a number of geographical puzzles, as pointed out by Simmons (1913) p. 111. In
the course of many seasons’ collecting in many parts of the Canadian Arctic
from the Alaska boundary to Hudson Bay, the writer paid special attention to
this genus. Of its purple-flowered members, two of the most elusive and
puzzling species appear to be O. roaldi Ostenf. and O. arctica R. Br. In six
seasons’ collecting in the Mackenzie District the writer never succeeded in
finding the former, which thus far is known only from the type locality
(Herschel Island). Of the latter Fernald (1928) in addition to the type
(Melville Island), recognized but one collection (between Coppermine River and
Cape Alexander, Rae): Ostenfeld l.c. (??) did not find it in the Gjoi
Expedition collections. Several recorded by Macoun and Holm (1921) as O.
roaldi, Fernald was unable to identify with either that species or with O.
arctica. He therefore described the Can. Arct. Exp. plant as O. coronaminis,
to be distinguished from O. arctica ‘by its much larger flowers, longer
calyx-tube and calyx-teeth and very large corolla with vexillum (banner petal)
fully twice as broad as in true O. arctica’. But in several numbers cited by
Fernald in the National Herbarium of Canada, the size of the flower and the
length of the corolla, calyx-tube and calyx-teeth vary greatly. In McMillan’s
collection from Melville Island (77294 CAN), the corolla is 1.5 cm long and
the teeth of the calyx one quarter as long as the tube. In a specimen from
near the type locality of O. coronaminus (A.E. & R.T. Porsild 4745), the
flowers are even smaller and the calyx-teeth vary in length from one quarter
to one third of the length of the calyx tube. Likewise in the stipules, often
of systematic value in this genus, there does not appear to be any difference
between O. coronaminus and O. arctica. To the description given by Fernald
(1928) for O. coronaminis, it may be added that the veins of the free blades
of the stipules are green and very conspicuous; the main vein has a number of
upward pointed side branches and ends of the green tip of the blade; the
edges, besides the long, white ciliae, are beset with large sessile glands or
papillae. Thus if O. coronaminis is conspecific with O. arctica, the
distribution of the latter becomes more natural, making it an endemic of the
central and western Arctic Archipelago and the mainland from Anderson River,
east to Bathurst Inlet, possibly with an isolated station in the mountains of
central Alaska (Steese Highway, Eagle Summit 3880’ elev., E. Scamman 806;
Richardson Highway, Miller House, 4800’elev., idem 807 both in Gray Herb.).
The following specimens are in the writer’s collection from the Mackenzie
District. Arctic coast: Cape Dalhousie, old dunes and dry tundra Porsild 2780,
dry andy slope, 2779B; Great Bear Lake: North Shore of Dease Arm, near
headwaters of Horton R. Porsild 4745”. (385) This name, used by Porsild (164)
has been widely accepted since the species was first described. (431) Code
used for graphics files: faoxar.


Oxytropis arctica var. bellii <(Britt.) ex Macoun) Boivin>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) O. bellii (Britt.ex. Macoun)
Palibin. (385) Porsild (1964) treated the taxon under the name O. bellii
(Britt.) Palibine and indicated that it should be looked for in the Arctic
Archipelago. It has not been found. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: faoxab.


Oxytropis arctobia <Bunge>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) =Oyxtropis nigrescens
(Pollos) Fisch. ex DC. var. uniflora (Hook.) Barn. . (385) This name was used
by Porsild (1964). It is here treated as O. nigrescens (Pollos) Fisch. ex DC.
var. uniflora (Hook.) Barn., following the treatment by Welsh,n of the taxon,
in Flora North America. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used
for graphics files: faoxat.


Oxytropis borealis <Nutt.> var. hudsonica <(E. Greene) Barneby>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) Astragalus hudsonica
(Greene) Barneby Oxytropis glutinosa Porsild. Oxytropis uralensis C.A. Mey
var. subsucculenta Hook. Oxytropis hudsonica (Greene) Fern. Oxytropis viscida
Nutt. var. hudsonica (E. Greene) Barneby. (11) Plants 8-25 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <loosely from freely branching
compact stems>. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems densely
hairy. (52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules sheathing. (54) Stipules white <or
pale brown, stongly adnate to the petiole>. (58) Petioles 10-20(-25) mm long.
(82) Leaves deciduous <midribs of previous season’s leaves persisting>. (83)
Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves
5-10 cm long. (90) Leaves 5-15 mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets
15-33. (100) Leaflets 4-6 mm long. (102) Leaflets oblong. (105) Leaf blades
hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs on the abaxial <sparse and with numerous
sub-epidermal glands>, or with hairs equally dense on both surfaces <densely>.
(119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136)
Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 3.5-15 cm long. (151)
Inflorescence racemose <spike short, not elongating when as fruit mature>.
(160) Inflorescence 0.5-1.5 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 7-13.
(193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length <fragrant when
fresh>. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (258) Sepals brown <black>. (259)
Sepals hairy. (263) Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx 5-lobed <Calyx lobes deltoid,
one-quater to one third as long as the tube, O. hudsonia (Greene) Fern. Calyx
lobes deltoid, one-half to two-thirds as long as the tube O. glutinosa
Porsild>. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and fused. (268) Petals
purple, or blue <on the tops of the petals, paler towards the base>. (269)
Petals with contrasting markings <particularly dark veins on the banner petal
that act as insect guide lines>. (270) Petals obovate <4 petals>. (271) Petals
unlobed <4 petals>, or 2-lobed <banner petal>. (272) Petals 15-20(-25) mm
long. (276) Corolla papilionaceous. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free <or
almost free 1 stamen>, or fused <9 stamens in an open tube>. (279) Stamens
filaments markedly unequal in length. (293) Carpels monomerous. (313) Stigmas
per style 1. (316) Placentation axile <marginal>. (317) Ovules 20-30. (325)
Fruit a legume <beaked at the tip>. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327)
Fruit 15-22 mm long. (328) Fruit 5-7 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent <opening at the apex>. (332) Fruit yellowish <or gray>. (333) Fruit
hairy <with dark hairs>. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting <as a thin thread at the end of the beaked legumes>. (356) Seeds
3-10. (357) Seeds 1.8-2.2 mm long <longest dimension>. (358) Seeds brown.
(359) Seeds smooth. (364) North American <endemic in the Hudson Bay region,
the central Canadian Arctic and on Banks Island>. (365) Low arctic <Confirned
to the western half of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, south of the 70th
parallel>. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Banks. (373) Substrate type:
calcareous. (374) Rocky sites <gravelly and sandy places, on peat in snow
patches>. (381) Northernmost record, N.W.T., Igloolik 69°22'N. The specimen
was collected during Parry’s second expedition, 1821-23. It isn in the British
Musuem as O. uralensis, (Polunin 1940). (384) Porsild (1957) recognized O
glutinosa Porsild as similar to O husdonica and possibly closely related to it
but differing by having a much longer, subulate teeth on the clayx and by its
inflorescence, which, unlike that of O. hudsonica, is considerabley elongated
in fruit. The foliage of O. glutinosa, which is distinctly clammy to the touch
because of the presence of numerous glands is very fragrant when fresh. (385)
Porsild (1964) recognized both O. hudsonica Greene Fern. and O. glutinosa
Porsild, here considered to be parts of the variation of this single taxon.
(431) Code used for graphics files: faoxbo.


Oxytropis bellii <(Britt.) Palibine>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) =Oxytropis arctica var.
bellii (Britt.) ex Macoun) Boivin. (385) Porsild (1964) used this name. It is
currently considered a variety of O. arctica but excluded here as it has not
yet been found in the Arctic Archipelago. (424) Morphological data not coded.
(431) Code used for graphics files: faoxbe.


Oxytropis campestris <(L.) DC.> var. minor <(Hooker) Barneby.>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (4) Welsh, S. 1995, Great Basin
naturalist 55: 277. (8) Oxytropis terrae-novae Fern. Oxytropis arctica var.
terrae-novae (Fern.) Barneby. (11) Plants 7-15 cm high. (14) Plants perennial
herbs <fresh green>. (15) Plants tufted <loosely>. (18) Taproot present. (32)
Stems erect. (36) Stems <not visible; surrounded by leaf bases and stipules>.
(52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules not sheathing. (54) Stipules white <or
pale brown with long hairs on the margins; otherwise smooth>. (58) Petioles
20-60 mm long. (82) Leaves evergreen. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves 1-7.5(-9) cm long. (90) Leaves
5-20 mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets 12-24. (100) Leaflets 2-8 mm
long <0.5-4 mm wide>. (105) Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs
equally dense on both surfaces <sparse and disappearing with age; visible at
10X>. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (135) Flowering stems without leaves.
(136) Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 5-15 cm long. (151)
Inflorescence racemose. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-2 cm long. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence 3-7. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length.
(196) Flowers zygomorphic. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (258) Sepals
brown. (259) Sepals hairy. (263) Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx 5-lobed. (266)
Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and fused. (268) Petals orange <towards the
base>, or purple <violet at the tips>. (269) Petals with contrasting markings
<and colour gradation>. (270) Petals oblanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed <four
pertals>, or 2-lobed <banner petal>. (272) Petals 7-11 mm long. (276) Corolla
papilionaceous. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free <or almost free, 1
stamen>, or fused <9 stamens in an open tube>. (293) Carpels monomerous. (296)
Ovary superior. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation axile
<marginal>. (317) Ovules 16-26. (325) Fruit a legume. (326) Fruit
elongate-cylindrical <tapering to a beak>. (327) Fruit 12-15 mm long. (328)
Fruit 4-6 mm wide <inflated>. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332)
Fruit yellowish <with black hairs>. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit
styles persisting <thread-like on the tip of the beak>. (356) Seeds 8-10.
(357) Seeds 1.5-2.5 mm long <longest dimension>. (358) Seeds brown. (359)
Seeds smooth. (364) North American. (367) Rare <endemic to the eastern
Canadian sub-arctic. Locally frequent to abundant in its limited area>. (371)
Arctic Islands: Baffin <one record from Kimmirut>. (373) Substrate type:
calcareous. (374) Rocky sites <dry sandy and gravelly areas, especially in
open, sunny spots in heaths or grassy areas>. (380) Flowers and fruits
abundantly. (381) This species, was known to Polunin (1940) only from Kimmirut
(Lake Harbour). ANY CHANGE IN RECORDS? It should be looked for in Iqaluit and
considered as possibly an indicator of environmental change if it is found
further north. Northernmost record, Baffin Island, Kimmirut. (385) Porsild
(1964) recognized the taxon as a full species, O. terrae-novae Fern. (431)
Code used for graphics files: faoxcm.


Oxytropis campestris var. terrae-novae <(Fern.) Barneby>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) Oxytriouc terrae-novae Fern.
(385) Here treated as O. campestris var. minor. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: faoxtn.


Oxytropis campestris var. varians <(Rydb.) Barneby>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) Oxytropis hyperborea
Porsild. Oxytropis varians (Rydb.) K. Schum. . (11) Plants 5-35 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <caespitose, from stout freely
branched, often compact, stems>. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems decumbent.
(36) Stems <vegetative stems surrounded by leaf bases and not easily visible>.
(52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules not sheathing. (54) Stipules white <or
light brown, papery, with a few long hairs>. (58) Petioles 10-15 mm long. (84)
Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves 3-9 cm long. (90) Leaves
8-25 mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets 9-19. (105) Leaf blades
hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both surfaces. (119) Leaf
blade venation pinnate. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering
stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 5-20(-25) cm long <erect, or at the northern
end of the range often prostrate>. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (160)
Inflorescence 1-2(-6) cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 3-12. (193)
Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (196) Flowers
zygomorphic. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (258) Sepals of an unusual
colour. (259) Sepals hairy <densely so with mixed short black and long white
hairs>. (263) Calyx tubular <with deltoid teeth one third to one quarter of
the length of the tube>. (264) Calyx 5-lobed. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals
both free and fused. (268) Petals yellow <pale or fading light brown>. (269)
Petals with contrasting markings <colour differences that serve as guide lines
to visiting insects>. (270) Petals oblanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed <4
petals>, or 2-lobed <banner petal>. (272) Petals 13-17 mm long. (276) Corolla
papilionaceous. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free <or almost free, 1
stamen>, or fused <9 stamens fused into an open tube>. (279) Stamens filament
all equal in length <slightly unequal>. (293) Carpels monomerous. (308) Styles
free. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation axile <marginal>. (317)
Ovules 15-25. (325) Fruit a legume. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit 10-15 mm
long. (328) Fruit 3.5-4.5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent.
(332) Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit hairy <with black and white hairs>. (334)
Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting <threadlike at the end
of the recurved beak of the legume>. (356) Seeds 6-10. (357) Seeds 1-2 mm long
<longest dimension>. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (365) Low arctic.
(366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands <the arctic coast of the
Yukon, N.W. Mackenzie District and westernmost islands of the Arctic
Archipelago>. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Banks and Victoria. (373)
Substrate type: calcareous <sandy and gravelly sites>. (374) Rocky sites.
(385) The species was treated by Porsild (1964) as Oxytropis hyperborea
Porsild. (431) Code used for graphics files: faoxcv.


Oxytropis deflexa <(Pallas) DC.> subsp. foliolosa <(Hook.) Cody>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) Oxytropis deflexa Hook.
Oxytropis deflexa var. foliolosa (Hook.) Barneby Oxytropis foliolosa Hook.
Oxytropis deflexa var. capitata Boivin. (11) Plants 5-15 cm high <-20>. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <loosely>. (18) Taproot present.
(32) Stems erect <fresh green, delicate, with fern-like leaves>. (36) Stems
<stems obscured by surrounding hairy leaf bases>. (52) Stipules present. (54)
Stipules brown <pale>, or colourless. (58) Petioles (10-)15-40 mm long. (82)
Leaves evergreen. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves
compound. (89) Leaves 1.5-3 cm long. (90) Leaves 7-15 mm wide. (98) Leaves
pinnate. (99) Leaflets 15-23. (100) Leaflets 3-6(-7) mm long. (102) Leaflets
elliptic, or ovate <the tips and margins sometimes darker green or purplish>.
(104) Leaf blades adaxial surface shiny <sparse, surface almost glabrous>, or
shiny <pale hairs>. (105) Leaf blades hairy. (119) Leaf blade venation
pinnate. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy.
(145) Flowering stem 7-20 cm long. (160) Inflorescence 1-3 cm long. (192)
Flowers per inflorescence 3-7. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter
or length. (196) Flowers zygomorphic. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused.
(258) Sepals brown. (259) Sepals hairy <long black and sometimes white hairs>.
(263) Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx 5-lobed. (267) Petals both free and fused.
(268) Petals purple <violet>, or blue <on the tips of the petals>. (269)
Petals with contrasting markings <darker insect guide lines on the banner
petal; keel petals yellow towards the base>. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens
free <free, almost free, 1 stamen>, or fused <9 stamens in an open tube>.
(279) Stamens filament all equal in length <almost equal>. (293) Carpels
monomerous. (296) Ovary superior. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316)
Placentation axile <marginal>. (317) Ovules 4-10. (325) Fruit a legume. (326)
Fruit ellipsoid <on a stalk within the calyx; hanging downwards from the
flowering stem>. (327) Fruit 10-18 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-6 mm wide <to 10 mm
wide after opening>. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit
yellowish, or brown. (333) Fruit hairy <with black hairs>. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting <thread-like and inconspicuous>.
(356) Seeds 4-10. (357) Seeds 1.5-2 mm long <longest dimension>. (358) Seeds
brown <or yellowish>. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 16. (365) Alpine. (366)
Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin <Kimmirut, and Iqaluit,locally frequent in Quebec>. (373)
Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Rocky sites <sand and gravel bars by rivers
and lake shores. It is often associated with willows and grows almost as well
in closed heathy or grassy communities as in entirely open areas>. (380)
Flowers and fruits abundantly. (381) The northernmost record, N.W.T. south
coast of Corination Gulf, Tree River, 67°46'N, (Polunin 1940). The taxon has
been collected from Kimmirut, and Iqaluit, Baffin Island. Porsild (1964)
mapped a collection from the coast of midwestern Baffin Island, but this has
not been found. (384) The Iqaluit distribution records are new since Porsild
(1957). One site is near the airport, another near Arctic College. Is it
possible that the Iqaluit records were accidentally introduced form Kimmirut
(Lake Harbour)? Porsild (1957) mapped a collection from the coast of
midwestern Baffin Island but this has not been found. (385) Porsild
(1964)recognized this taxon as O. foliolosa Hook. (431) Code used for graphics
files: faoxma.


Oxytropis foliolosa <Hook.>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) =Oxytropis deflexa (Pallas)
DC. subsp. foliolosa (Hook.) Cody. (385) Name used in Porsild (1964), here
treated as Oxytropis deflexa var. foliosa (Hook). Barn. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: faoxfo.


Oxytropic glutinosa <Porsild>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) =Oxytropis viscida var.
subsucculenta (Hook.) Barneby. (385) Name used by Porsild (1964), here treated
as O. viscida var. hudsonica. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code
used for graphics files: faoxgl.


Oxytropic hudsonica <(Greene) Fern.>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) =Oxytropis viscida var.
hudsonica (Greene) Barneby. (385) Name used by Porsild (1964), here treated as
O. viscida var. hudsonica. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used
for graphics files: faoxhu.


Oxytropis hyperborea <Porsild>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) =Oxytropis campestris var.
varians (Rydb.) Barneby. (385) Name used by Porsild (1964), here treated as O.
varians. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics
files: faoxhy.


Oxytropis maydelliana <Trautv.>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) Oxytropis campestris (L.)
DC. subsp. melanocephala Hook. Oxytropis campestris var. glabrata Hook.
Oxytropis glabrata (Hook.) A. Nels. Oxytropis maybelliana subsp. melanocephala
(Hook.) Porsild. (11) Plants 10-30 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants tufted <from a compact stem zone that is covered with dense stipules>.
(18) Taproot present. (32) Stems decumbent. (36) Stems <not visible between
the leaf bases>. (52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules not sheathing. (54)
Stipules brown <usually chestnut brown or black, with long hairs particularly
at the apices>. (58) Petioles (15-)20-40(-45) mm long. (82) Leaves marcescent.
(83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves compound. (89)
Leaves 2-4(-5.5) cm long. (90) Leaves 6-16 mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99)
Leaflets 5-17. (100) Leaflets 3-9 mm long. (102) Leaflets oblong. (105) Leaf
blades glabrous <to the naked eye>, or hairy <with sparse white hairs seen at
10X>. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both surfaces <but mainly
on the lower surface>. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (135) Flowering
stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy <with white and sometimes
also black hairs>. (145) Flowering stem 6.5-10(-15) cm long. (150)
Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (160) Inflorescence
0.5-1.5 cm long <remaining compact when legumes are present>. (192) Flowers
per inflorescence (2-)5-9. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or
length. (196) Flowers zygomorphic. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (258)
Sepals yellow, or brown <appearing blackish>. (259) Sepals hairy <black and
sometimes white hairs>. (263) Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx 5-lobed. (266) Petals
5 <or almost free, 1 stamen>, or 2 <9 stamens>. (267) Petals both free and
fused. (268) Petals yellow <or cream>. (269) Petals with contrasting markings
<slight; veins in the banner petal somewhat conspicuous and acting as insect
guide lines>. (271) Petals unlobed <4 petals>, or 2-lobed <banner petal>.
(272) Petals (10-)15-20 mm long. (276) Corolla papilionaceous. (278) Stamens
free <or almost free, 1 stamen>, or fused <9 stamens fused in an open tube>.
(279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (293) Carpels monomerous. (313)
Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation axile <marginal>. (317) Ovules 15-25.
(325) Fruit a legume. (326) Fruit ovoid <with a prominent beak>. (327) Fruit
12-20 mm long. (328) Fruit 4.5-7.5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish, or green at maturity <drying grey>. (333)
Fruit hairy <with dense hairs that can vary from black to white on the same
pod>. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting <as a fine
thread at the tip of each legume beak>. (356) Seeds 5-12. (357) Seeds 1-2 mm
long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 96. (364) Not
circumpolar, amphi-Atlantic, amphi-Beringian, or North American <E. Asia,
arctic and subarctic North America>. (365) Low arctic. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin, or Parry Islands <Melville>, or Banks, or Victoria. (374) Hummocks
<common to abundant where it occurs, but conspicuously missing from
centralBaffin Island>, or rocky sites <towards its northern limit it is found
on open clay- plains and gravel ridges, where it may flourish and become the
most conspicuous species. (See illustration in image library)>. (381)
Northernmost record, N.W.T. Northern Baffin, Strathcona Sound, 73°15'N,
(specimen at CAN). (385) Porsild (1964) used this name that has been widely
accepted. (431) Code used for graphics files: faoxnma.


Oyxtropis nigrescens <(Pollos) Fisch. ex DC.> var. uniflora <(Hook.) Barn.>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) Oxytropis arctobia Bunge
Oxytropis nigrescens subsp. arctobia (Bunge) Hultén. Oxytropis nigrescens var.
arctobia (Bunge) Gray. Oxytropis arctobia var. hyperarctica Polunin, Holotype:
CAN (Name not accounted for in Kartsez (1994). (11) Plants 1-5 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants cushion-like <velvety-grey and up to 30 cm
in diameter>. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems densely hairy
<not easily visible between the appressed leaves>. (52) Stipules present. (53)
Stipules sheathing <base of petiole expanded, stipules surrounding the stem>.
(54) Stipules white <or pale grey from numerous hairs>. (58) Petioles 5-15 mm
long <not very obvious>. (82) Leaves evergreen. (83) Leaves distributed along
the stems <that are very compact>. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves
compound. (89) Leaves 5-8 cm long. (90) Leaves 3-6 mm wide. (98) Leaves
pinnate. (99) Leaflets 5-9. (100) Leaflets 3-4.5 mm long <often conduplicate,
i.e. margins rolled inwards, and with dense grey hairs>. (105) Leaf blades
hairy <densely so>. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both
surfaces. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (135) Flowering stems without
leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 0.5-1.5 cm long
<flowers are borne, just above the leaves, on the plant cushion>. (149)
Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences <and often numerous on the plant
cushion>. (160) Inflorescence 0.1-0.2 cm long <if applicable>. (192) Flowers
per inflorescence 1-2. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or
length. (196) Flowers zygomorphic. (256) Sepals fused. (258) Sepals green, or
brown <or appearing black>. (259) Sepals hairy <with numerous black hairs>.
(263) Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx 5-lobed. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals both
free and fused. (268) Petals purple <at the tips of the petals, fading to
light brown>. (269) Petals with contrasting markings <yellow insect guide
lines along veins and towards the base of the petals>. (270) Petals obovate.
(271) Petals unlobed <4 petals>, or 2-lobed <banner petal>. (272) Petals 8-12
mm long. (276) Corolla papilionaceous. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens fused
<free, or almost free, 1 stamen>, or fused <9 stamens in an open tube>. (279)
Stamens filament all equal in length <slightly unequal>. (293) Carpels
monomerous. (296) Ovary superior. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316)
Placentation axile <marginal>. (317) Ovules 15-25. (325) Fruit a legume
<sessile within the calyx>. (326) Fruit ellipsoid, or elongate-cylindrical.
(327) Fruit (15-)25-30 mm long. (328) Fruit 6-9 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry.
(331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit black. (333) Fruit hairy. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting <thread-like>. (356) Seeds 10-20.
(357) Seeds 1.2-1.6 mm long <longest dimension>. (358) Seeds brown. (359)
Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 16. (365) Low arctic <endemic to the central Canadian
arctic from Northern Baffin to Melville Peninsula and the south coast of
Baffin; also on Southampton and adjacent island in Hudson Bay>. (366) Of
limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin,
Parry Islands, Banks, and Victoria. (374) Rocky sites <limestone gravels>.
(380) At anthesis this species is strikingly handsome when the firm grey
cussions of large individuals may be covered with several hundred flowers. In
fruit the legumes are large and black and show up against the ashy-grey
foliage, which otherwise tends to blend in with the grey gravel on which it
grows. (381) The northernmost record is Baffin Island, Arctic Bay, 73°05'N.
(384) Polunin (1940) noted that there is a specimen of this species in the
Gray Herbarium among a collecton that has often been referred to as coming
from Melville Island, but acturally was made far to the southeast during
Parry’s second voyage. He indicated that the Arctic Bay material differs from
all other specimens that he had examined in having seeds that are light brown
instead of almost black when ripe, and having hte insides of the pods
essientially glabrous instead of flocculent-pubescent. The pubescence on the
outside also tends to be less dense and spreading. On these characters he
recongnized O. arctobia var. hyperarctica Polunin. This taxon has not been
widely taken up. (385) Porsild (1964) recognized the taxon as O. arctobia
Bunge. (431) Code used for graphics files: faoxni.


Oxytropis podocarpa <Gray>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) Oxytropis podocarpa var.
inflata (hook.) Boivin. (11) Plants 2-6 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants cushion-like <but not as densely as cushions of O. nigrescens var.
uniflora>. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems <not visible in
the dense cushions>. (52) Stipules present. (53) Stipules sheathing <most
readily seen among the previous season’s growth>. (54) Stipules brown <pale>,
or white. (58) Petioles 5-12 mm long. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves
mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves 7-12 cm
long. (90) Leaves 6-9 mm wide. (98) Leaves pinnate. (99) Leaflets (5-)7-13.
(100) Leaflets 2-5 mm long. (102) Leaflets linear. (105) Leaf blades hairy <a
silky grey pubescence>. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both
surfaces. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (135) Flowering stems without
leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (149) Flowers solitary <rarely>, or in
inflorescences <of two flowers>. (151) Inflorescence racemose <when two
flowers are present>. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or
length. (196) Flowers zygomorphic. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals fused. (258)
Sepals brown <bluish>. (259) Sepals hairy. (263) Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx
5-lobed. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals both free and fused. (268) Petals
purple, or blue <violet>. (269) Petals with contrasting markings <insect guide
lines and colour gradation from intense colour at the tips of the petals to
pale at the bases>. (270) Petals oblanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed <four
petals>, or 2-lobed <banner petal>. (272) Petals 11-16 mm long. (276) Corolla
papilionaceous. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free <1 stamen free or almost
free>, or fused <9 stamens fused in an open tube>. (279) Stamens filament all
equal in length <or almost>. (293) Carpels monomerous. (296) Ovary superior.
(316) Placentation axile <marginal>. (317) Ovules 20-28. (325) Fruit a legume
<on a stalk within the calyx>. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit 12-20 mm long <?
to 30 mm long, Porsild, 1964>. (328) Fruit 6-10 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry.
(331) Fruit dehiscent <from the tip of the legume>. (332) Fruit black. (333)
Fruit hairy. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting <as a
thread-like structure on the beak of the legume>. (356) Seeds 16-24. (357)
Seeds 1.5-2 mm long. (358) Seeds black, or brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n
= <?>. (364) Not circumpolar, amphi-Atlantic, amphi-Beringian, or North
American <A rare species of peculiar disrupted range. Known thus far from the
Rocky mountains, northern Labrador and southern Baffin Island>. (365) Low
arctic. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Iqaluit, Amajuak Bay>. (374)
Rocky sites <sand and gravel ridges>. (384) Porsild (1964) mapped records for
Kimmirut and Cape Dorset. These have not been confirmed. (385) Porsild (1964)
mapped records for Kimmirut (Lake Harbour) and Cape Dorset. These have not
been confirmed?? JACK. (431) Code used for graphics files: faoxpo.


Oxytropis terrae-novae <Fern>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) Oxytropis campestris var.
terrae-novae (Fern.) Barneby. (385) Name used by Porsild (1964), here treated
as O. campestris var. terrae-novae. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: faoxtn.


Oxytropis viscida <Nut.> var. hudsonica <(E. Greene) Barneby>

      (2) Fabaceae (Leguminosae), pea family. (8) Aragallus hudsonicus Greene
?Oxytropis borealis DC ?Oxytropis hudsonica (Greene) Fern. ?Oxytropis
leucantha (Pallas) Pers. p.p. (385) Here treated as Oxytropis borealis var.
hudsonica. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics
files: faoxvs.


Gentianaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Gentian family. (2) Gentianaceae. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(387) Dahlgren's Superorder Gentianiflorae. (398) Dahlgren's Order
Boraginales. (401) Dahlgren's Order 1 1. Gentianales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Asteridae. (412) Cronquist's Order Gentianales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Asteridae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Gentianaceae. (420)
Takhtajan's Order Gentianales. (421) 900 species. (422) 80 genera. (423)
Genera in study region: Gentiana. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425)
Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: ge.


Gentianella propinqua subsp. propinqua <(Richards.) J.M. Gillett>

      (1) Four-parted gentian; small flowered gentian. (2) Gentianaceae. (4)
Franklin Narr. 1 st Jour. 734. 1823. (7) Gentiana arctophila Griesb. Gentiana
propinqua Richards. Gentiana propinqua subsp. arctophila (Griesb.) Hultén For
further synonymy see Gillet (1957). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high <on
Arctic islands>. (11) Plants 2-10(-15) cm high. (14) Plants annual herbs. (15)
Plants single-stemmed, or in basal rosettes, or with many stems arising from a
caudex <the basal branches frequently bearing reduced flowers>. (18) Taproot
present. (20) Roots yellow, or pallid-brown. (32) Stems erect, or somewhat
curving. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous.
(57) Petioles absent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems, or in a basal
rosette <basal leaves may appear whorled in tiny plants>. (84) Leaves
opposite. (89) Leaves 0.4-1.5(-3.5) cm long. (90) Leaves 1-6(-10) mm wide.
(93) Leaf blades elliptic, or spatulate. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the
vertical. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation inconspicuous,
or reticulate. (125) Leaf bases truncate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf
margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (133) Leaf apices acute, or obtuse.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145)
Flowering stem 0-6.5 cm long. (149) Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences
<with few flowers>. (151) Inflorescence cymose <if applicable, the central
flower largest>. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length, or
large, greater than 15 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals
fused <at the base>. (257) Sepals 5-10(-12) mm long. (259) Sepals glabrous
<the tube 2-3 mm long>. (263) Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx 4-lobed <the lobes
well developed>. (267) Petals fused. (268) Petals blue <pale>, or white. (272)
Petals 15-25 mm long. (275) Corolla 4-lobed <the lobes triangular-ovate, each
ending with a point>. (276) Corolla tubular <folded between the lobes, opening
unfringed>. (277) Stamens 4. (280) Stamens fused to the corolla <at or below
the middle>. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous <between the stamens are glands
that appear as a pale green patch>. (282) Anthers purple <blue>. (283) Anthers
stout-cylindrical. (285) Anthers 0.4-0.6 mm long. (286) Nectaries in bisexual
flowers present <at the base of the ovary>. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (295)
Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (297) Ovaries inverse club-shaped. (299)
Ovaries glabrous. (306) Stipes 0.4-0.6 mm long. (316) Placentation parietal.
(317) Ovules 40-60. (325) Fruit a capsule <longer than the marcescent collar>.
(326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 10-20(-25) mm long. (328) Fruit
2.5-4 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish,
or brown. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (357) Seeds
0.5-1 mm long <ovoid, slightly flattened>. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds
smooth <or minutely wrinkled at 40X>. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (371) Arctic Islands: Banks, or Victoria.
(373) Substrate type: calcareous <weakly>. (375) Substrate imperfectly
drained. (377) Substrate gravel, or sand, or till. (378) Substrate with low
organic content. (379) Lake shores, or sea shore <sandbars>. (384) This is a
colonizing species on dry sunny slopes and herbmats. It is easily recognized
by the larger terminal flowers, with apiculate (pointed) petal tips. Gillett
(1957) reported that he climbed Mt. Caribou in the Yukon and observed that
plants decreased in size without any apparent break in the population
continuity. (431) Code used for graphics files: gegepr.


Gentianella tenella (Rottb.) B”erner

      (2) Gentianaceae. (4) Börner, Fl. deut. Volk., 542. 1912. (7) Gentiana
tenella L. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high <on Arctic islands>. (11) Plants
4-15(-25) cm high. (14) Plants annual herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed
<rarely>, or in basal rosettes, or with many stems arising from a caudex. (18)
Taproot present. (20) Roots yellow, or pallid-brown. (32) Stems erect, or
somewhat curving. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems
glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems, or in
a basal rosette. (84) Leaves opposite. (89) Leaves 0.4-1 cm long. (90) Leaves
1-3 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades elliptic, or spatulate. (96) Leaf blades
spreading from the vertical. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade
venation appearing single-veined, or reticulate. (125) Leaf bases attenuate
<somewhat clasping the stem>. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins
entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (133) Leaf apices acuminate, or acute.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145)
Flowering stem 1-10 cm long. (149) Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences
<with few flowers>. (151) Inflorescence cymose <if applicable, central flower
largest>. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (163) Inflorescence main
axis smooth. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length, or
medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 4, or 5. (256)
Sepals fused <at the base>. (257) Sepals 4.5-7.5(-10) mm long. (258) Sepals
green. (259) Sepals glabrous. (263) Calyx tubular. (264) Calyx 4-lobed, or
5-lobed. (267) Petals fused. (268) Petals blue, or white. (272) Petals
8-10(-16) mm long. (275) Corolla 4-lobed, or 5-lobed <triangular- ovate>.
(276) Corolla tubular <folded between the lobes, with two fringed scales at
the point where the fused petals divide into lobes>. (277) Stamens 4, or 5.
(280) Stamens fused to the corolla <near the upper third of the corolla tube>.
(281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow. (283) Anthers
subglobose <oval>. (285) Anthers 0.4-0.6(-1) mm long. (286) Nectaries in
bisexual flowers present <at the base of the ovary>. (293) Carpels syncarpous.
(295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (316)
Placentation parietal. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit
elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit 8-14 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-3 mm wide. (330)
Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish, or brown. (333) Fruit
glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (357) Seeds 0.4-0.75 mm long <ovoid,
slightly flattened>. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (366) Of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (371) Arctic Islands: Banks, or Somerset.
(375) Substrate imperfectly drained, or dry. (377) Substrate rock, or gravel.
(379) Wet meadows, or lake shores, or tundra, or slopes. (384) Gillett (1963)
noted that G. tenella also occur in northern Europe and Asia. In the southern
parts of these continents it is found in the mountians. With the exception of
a small population from the Pribilof Islands, Alaska, described at subsp.
pribilofii J.M. Gillett all American material is subsp. tenella. Gillett
(1963) suggested that collectors often overlook this specis because is can be
mistaken for Gentianella propinqua which may explain the scattered
distribution records. (431) Code used for graphics files: gegete.


Lomatogonium rotatum <(L.) Fries>

      (1) Marsh Felwort. (2) Gentianaceae. (4) Summa Veg. Scand. Sect. Post.
554. 1849. (7) Swertia rotata L. Gentiana rotata (L.) Froel. Pleurogyne rotata
(L.) Griesb. Lomatogonium rotatum f. ovalifolium Fern. (10) Plants less than
15 cm high <Arctic Islands>, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 5-10(-30) cm
high. (14) Plants annual herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed, or with branching
stems. (18) Taproot present <poorly developed>. (20) Roots yellow. (32) Stems
erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous.
(57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves withering early. (83) Leaves mostly basal,
or distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves opposite. (89) Leaves 0.5-2 cm
long. (90) Leaves 0.1-0.3 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades elliptic, or spatulate
<basal leaves, somewhat crowded, especially in small plants>, or ovate, or
oblanceolate <median leaves>. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical.
(105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation inconspicuous. (125)
Leaf bases truncate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128)
Leaf margins entire. (133) Leaf apices obtuse. (135) Flowering stems with
leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 2-8 cm long.
(149) Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences <terminal single flowers lateral
branches>. (151) Inflorescence cymose <if aplpicable>. (193) Flowers
medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length <continental North America>. (255)
Sepals 4, or 5. (256) Sepals fused <only near the base>. (257) Sepals 5-15 mm
long <0.5-1.5 mm wide>. (258) Sepals green <linear-lanceolate, acute>. (259)
Sepals glabrous. (263) Calyx rotate. (266) Petals 4, or 5. (267) Petals fused
<at the base only>. (268) Petals blue <pale>. (272) Petals 5-10 mm long. (275)
Corolla 4-lobed, or 5-lobed <the lobes ovate to pointed>. (276) Corolla rotate
<the tube very short, not folded: each lobe bearing several fringed scales at
the base>. (277) Stamens 4, or 5. (280) Stamens fused to the corolla <at the
base>. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous <flattened>. (282) Anthers blue. (283)
Anthers stout-cylindrical. (285) Anthers 0.4-0.6 mm long. (286) Nectaries in
bisexual flowers present <at the base of the corolla tube alternate with the
stamens>. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior.
(297) Ovaries oblong. (299) Ovaries glabrous <sessile>. (316) Placentation
parietal. (317) Ovules 100 <numerous>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit
ellipsoid <the valves strongly recurving at the tip>. (327) Fruit 10-15 mm
long <exerted from the marcescent and closed corolla>. (328) Fruit 3-4 mm
wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish, or brown.
(333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (357) Seeds 0.5-0.75 mm
long <longer than wide>. (359) Seeds smooth <slight texture seen at 40X>.
(365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367)
Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Victoria. (431) Code used for graphics files:
geloro.


Halorgaceae <R.Br.>

      (1) Water milfoil family. (2) Haloragaceae, watermilfoil family. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Myrtiflorae. (396)
Dahlgren's Order Haloragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Rosidae. (411)
Cronquist's Order Haloragales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Myrtanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Myrtales. (421) 120
species. (422) 8 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Myriophyllum. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics
files: ha.


Myriophyllum sibiricum <Komorov>

      (1) Water milfoil. (2) Haloragaceae, watermilfoil family. (8)
Myriophyllum exalbescens Fern. Myriophyllum spicatum subsp. exalbescens
(Fern.) Hultén Myriophyllum spicatum var. exalbescens (Fern.) Jepson
Myriophyllum spicatum var. squamosum (Laestad. ex Hartman) Hartman. (11)
Plants 5-20 cm high <in Arctic collections, commonly to 100 cm in Southern
Canada>. (14) Plants annual herbs <from persisting over wintering buds or
“turions”>. (17) Plants vegetatively proliferating by bulbils <if turions are
considered a form of vegetative proliferation>. (21) Plants without easily
seen horizontal stems <plants grown from turions have a U-shaped basal stem>.
(32) Stems erect <in deep water>, or prostrate <when stranded>. (36) Stems
glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent, or present <very short>.
(58) Petioles 0-0.2 mm long. (82) Leaves evergreen, or deciduous <in southern
lakes. Turion turion leaves persist for more than 12 months in Arctic
specimens>. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves whorled. (86)
Leaves heterophyllous <often with smaller thicker dark green turion leaves at
the base of the plant and larger, green summer leaves>. (87) Leaves simple.
(88) Leaves lobed. (89) Leaves 1-2.5 cm long <in Arctic specimens to 4.5 cm
long in plants growing in southern Canada>. (90) Leaves 15-35 mm wide
<Arctic>. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present <as
dark pores on the stems>. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (193) Flowers small,
less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (195) Flowers unisexual <female flowers
basal, male flowers towards the top of the inflorescense, occasionally
bisexual flowers occur in the middle of the spike>. (254) Sepals absent
<female flowers>, or present <male flowers>. (265) Petals absent <female
flowers>, or present <male flowers, caducous>. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals
free. (268) Petals pink. (269) Petals without contrasting markings <deep pink
at apex but fading to a pale pink>. (277) Stamens 8. (278) Stamens free. (293)
Carpels partly fused <at central axis, but with four distinct outer lobes>.
(296) Ovary superior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 4. (316) Placentation
axile. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a schizocarp. (326) Fruit of an unusual
shape <4 mericarps, unknown in arctic specimens>. (327) Fruit 1-2 mm long.
(328) Fruit 0.8-1.1 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit schizocarpous. (332)
Fruit brown. (333) Fruit glabrous <with slight warts>. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (356) Seeds 1. (357) Seeds 1-1.9 mm long. (358) Seeds white. (359)
Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 42. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin. (373) Substrate
type: acidic. (374) Aquatic <shallow, calcareous streams>. (383) Porsild
(1964) used the name Haloragaceae for the family and reported a single
collection from the west coast of Baffin Island as the only collection from
the Arctic Archipelago under the name Myriophyllum exalbescens Fern. Aiken and
Cronquist (1988) explained why this name falls into synonymy under M. sibricum
which they lectotypified. Plants collected from the Arctic Archipelago reflect
the short and cold growing season available for submerged aquatic plants. The
plants are usually 10-15 cm long with evidence of the previous season’s
turions in a characteristically curved base and smaller, thicker, dark green
leaves. Plants collected before the end of August were already developing the
next season’s overwintering turions without having flowered. The “constipated
duck” theory has been employed jokingly by the Aquatic Plant Management
Society as a possible explanation of the spread and distribution of
Myriophyllum spicatum in North America. Given the large flocks of migrating
birds that nest in the Arctic this may explain the occurrence of Myriophyllum
records on the Arctic Archipelago as plants that are vegetative only and
achieve such little annual growth, would be expected to become weaker and die
out over a relatively short period of time. While definitive identification is
difficult on vegetative specimens, the variation in the shape of over
wintering turions and the transition between turion leaves and summer leaves
in different samples, lead S.G. Aiken to suggest that M. verticillatum may
also be present in the Arctic Archipelago (for shape differences see Aiken et
al. 1979; Aiken and Waltz). If flowering specimens of Myriophyllum are
collected in the Arctic Islands this would be a strong indication that the
area is a thermal oasis, or indicitive of a general warming trend in the
climate. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Myrtiflorae. (396) Dahlgren's Order Haloragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass
Rosidae. (411) Cronquist's Order Haloragales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass
Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Myrtanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order
Myrtales. (431) Code used for graphics files: hamysi.


Hippuridaceae <Link>

      (1) Mare's tail family. (2) Hippuridaceae, mare's tail family. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Lamiflorae. (402)
Dahlgren's Order Hippuridales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Asteridae. (412)
Cronquist's Order Callitrichales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Asteridae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Laminae. (420) Takhtajan's Order Scrophulariales. (421)
1-3 species. (422) 1 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Hippuris. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics
files: hi.


Hippuris vulgaris <L.>

      (1) Mares tail. (2) Hippuridaceae, mare's tail family. (8) No synonymy,
Kartesz 1994. (9) Plants bisexual <usually, but occasionally female only>.
(11) Plants 10-50 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (21) Plants with short
horizontal stems <and semi-horizontal stems, rooting in soft substrates>. (22)
Plants rhizomatous <but rarely found on herbarium specimens>. (32) Stems
erect. (36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82)
Leaves marcescent <persisting into the first winter>. (84) Leaves whorled
<4-10 leaves per whorl>. (86) Leaves heterophyllous <particularly when plants
grow in shallow water>, or not heterophyllous <submerged plants>. (87) Leaves
simple. (89) Leaves (0.2-)0.5-1.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-2 mm wide. (93)
Leaf blades linear. (97) Leaf blades succulent <emergent leaves>, or
membranous <submerged leaves>. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (150) Inflorescence
axillary. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in
diameter or length. (195) Flowers unisexual, or bisexual. (196) Flowers
zygomorphic <very reduced>. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277)
Stamens 1 <arising from the top of the ovary>. (293) Carpels monomerous. (296)
Ovary inferior. (316) Placentation apical. (317) Ovules 1 <pendulous>. (325)
Fruit a nut. (326) Fruit spherical. (327) Fruit 1.8-2.2 mm long. (328) Fruit
0.8-1.2 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (356) Seeds 1.
(357) Seeds 1.8-2.2 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (360) 2n = 32 <19 counts in
Löve and Löve 1975>. (364) <Cosmopolitan? - Hultén 1968>. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin, Ellesmere, Banks, Victoria, and Somerset. (374) Aquatic.
(386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (402) Dahlgren's Order Hippuridales. (406)
Cronquist's Subclass Asteridae. (412) Cronquist's Order Callitrichales. (413)
Takhtajan's Subclass Asteridae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Laminae. (420)
Takhtajan's Order Scrophulariales. (421) 1-3 species. (422) 1 genera. (423)
Genera in study region: Hippuris. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics
files: hihivu.


Juncaceae <L.>

      (1) Rush family. (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (9) Plants bisexual. (11)
Plants 3-22.41-50 cm high. (12) Plants herbs. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants tufted, or in basal rosettes. (17) Plants not vegetatively
proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (21) Plants with conspicuously
long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems, or without easily seen
horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous. (32) Stems erect.
(36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles present, or absent. (82) Leaves deciduous,
or marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal, or distributed along the stems. (84)
Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88)
Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 1-30 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.3-4 mm wide. (93)
Leaf blades linear. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous.
(106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both surfaces. (118) Leaf blades
hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (132) Leaf
margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes
absent. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous.
(145) Flowering stem 0-5 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral
bracts. (149) Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence
terminal, or axillary. (151) Inflorescence fasciculate. (159) Inflorescence
without bulbils. (160) Inflorescence 0-0.6 cm long. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence 1-10. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length,
or medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196)
Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals
free. (258) Sepals yellow, or brown. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals
scarious. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 3.
(267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow, or brown. (269) Petals without
contrasting markings. (270) Petals lanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272)
Petals 2.4-6.5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals shorter than
the calyx, or same length as the calyx. (277) Stamens 3, or 6. (278) Stamens
free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the
corolla. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (296) Ovary
superior. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1.
(313) Stigmas per style 3. (317) Ovules 10-100. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326)
Fruit ellipsoid, or elongate-cylindrical, or obovate. (327) Fruit 2.5-8 mm
long. (328) Fruit 1-3 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332)
Fruit yellowish, or black, or brown. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting, or calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting, or styles
not persistent. (356) Seeds 10-100. (357) Seeds 0.4-3.5 mm long. (358) Seeds
brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 30, or 60, or 80, or 120, or 130-134.
(364) Circumpolar, or amphi-Atlantic, or North American. (365) Arctic, or low
arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands, or of limited distribution
in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common, or uncommon, or rare. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or
Banks, or Victoria. (373) Substrate type: calcareous, or halophytic. (374) Wet
meadows, or moist areas, or rocky sites. (385) With two genera and Luzula.
(386) Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder Commeliniflorae.
(405) Dahlgren's Order Cyperales. (421) 400 species. (422) 8 genera. (423)
Genera in study region: Juncus, Luzula. (424) Morphological data coded. (425)
Family. (426) Accepted in this study. (431) Code used for graphics files: ju.


Juncus <L.>

      (1) Bog rush. (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (9) Plants bisexual. (11)
Plants 3-22.41-50 cm high. (12) Plants herbs. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants tufted, or in basal rosettes, or not applicable. (17) Plants not
vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems glabrous.
(57) Petioles present, or absent. (82) Leaves deciduous, or marcescent. (83)
Leaves mostly basal, or distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate.
(86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed.
(89) Leaves 3-25 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.3-4 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (106) Leaf blades
with hairs equally dense on both surfaces. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface
glabrous. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134)
Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136)
Flowering stems glabrous. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149)
Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal, or
axillary. (151) Inflorescence fasciculate. (159) Inflorescence without
bulbils. (160) Inflorescence 0-0.6 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence
1-10. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length, or
medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196)
Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals
free. (258) Sepals yellow, or brown. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals
scarious. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 3.
(267) Petals free. (268) Petals brown. (269) Petals without contrasting
markings. (270) Petals lanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 2.4-6.5
mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals shorter than the calyx, or
same length as the calyx. (277) Stamens 3, or 6. (278) Stamens free. (279)
Stamens filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (293)
Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels completely fused. (296) Ovary superior.
(307) Styles present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (313)
Stigmas per style 3. (317) Ovules 10-36-100. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326)
Fruit ellipsoid, or elongate-cylindrical, or obovate. (327) Fruit 2.5-8 mm
long. (328) Fruit 1-1.791-3 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent.
(332) Fruit yellowish, or black, or brown. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit
calyx persisting, or calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting, or
styles not persistent. (356) Seeds 10-100. (357) Seeds 0.4-3.5 mm long. (358)
Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364) Circumpolar, or amphi-Atlantic, or
North American. (365) Arctic <3>, or low arctic <4>. (366) Wide-ranging in the
Arctic Islands, or of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367)
Common, or uncommon, or rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or
Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Banks, or Victoria. (373)
Substrate type: calcareous, or halophytic. (374) Wet meadows, or moist areas,
or rocky sites. (385) Represented in our area by six species. (386) Subclass
Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder Commeliniflorae. (405) Dahlgren's
Order Cyperales. (421) 400 species. (422) 8 genera. (425) Genus. (426)
Accepted in this study. (428) Guestimate 150 records. (431) Code used for
graphics files: juju.


Juncus albescens <(Lange) Fern.>

      (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (8) Juncus triglumis subsp. albescens (Lange)
Hultén. Juncus triglumis var. albescens Lange. (11) Plants 3-18 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems
glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 1.5-8 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.3-1 mm
wide <in diameter>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (133) Leaf apices acute. (135) Flowering stems
with leaves <scale-like leaves subtending the inflorescence>. (136) Flowering
stems glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 0-4 cm long. (149) Flowers in
inflorescences <flowers tightly clustered and superficially appearing to be a
single unit>. (150) Inflorescence terminal <but subtended by a short,
scale-like leaf>. (151) Inflorescence fasciculate. (160) Inflorescence
0.05-0.2 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 1-3(-5). (193) Flowers
small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length <inflorescence cluster 4-7 mm
wide>. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals yellow <straw coloured>, or brown
<reddish>. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals scarious. (266) Petals 3. (267)
Petals free. (268) Petals yellow <albino form>, or brown <and scarious>. (270)
Petals lanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 4-5 mm long. (274)
Petals same length as the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (296)
Ovary superior. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (313) Stigmas
per style 3. (317) Ovules 10-20 <estimate>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit
ellipsoid <apex rounded without a hollow notch. This contrasts with Juncus
biglumis>. (327) Fruit 3-4 mm long. (328) Fruit 1-2 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry.
(331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish, or brown. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds 10-20 <estimate>. (360)
2n = 130-134. (364) North American. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or
Ellesmere, or Banks, or Victoria. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374)
Moist areas <in tundra by the edge of ponds, gravelly alkaline sand, silty
beach swales>. (385) Porsild, 1957. (428) Possilby 10-15 records. (431) Code
used for graphics files: jujual.


Juncus arcticus <Willd.> subsp. arcticus

      (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (8) No synonymy in Kartesz (1994). (11)
Plants (10-)15-40(-50) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous <stout horizontal root stocks from which
arise stems growing in more of less straight rows>. (32) Stems erect. (36)
Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (87) Leaves simple <with prominent reddish brown scale leaves at
the base>. (89) Leaves 50-250 cm long. (90) Leaves 1-2 mm wide <in diameter>.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
parallel. (133) Leaf apices acute. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136)
Flowering stems glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 0.3-0.6 cm long. (150)
Inflorescence axillary <lateral at the base of a leaf 1.5-5 cm long>. (151)
Inflorescence fasciculate <flowers in a tight capitate structure>. (160)
Inflorescence 0.1-0.3 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 2-5. (193)
Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 3. (256)
Sepals free. (258) Sepals brown. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals scarious.
(266) Petals 3. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals brown <scarious>. (270) Petals
lanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 4-5 mm long. (274) Petals same
length as the calyx. (277) Stamens 3. (278) Stamens free. (296) Ovary
superior. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (313) Stigmas per
style 3. (317) Ovules 30-40. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit 3.5-4.5 mm
long. (328) Fruit 1.8-2.2 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent.
(332) Fruit black, or brown. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (356) Seeds 30-40. (357) Seeds 0.7-1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown.
(359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 80. (364) Amphi-Atlantic. (365) Low arctic.
(366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common <where it
occurs>. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <eastern Arctic>. (373) Substrate type:
calcareous. (374) Moist areas <sand bars in rivers, and pioneer habitats>.
(385) J. arcticus subsp. alaskanus Hultén occurs on adjacent continental North
America. Given the confusion with the name J. balticus var. alaskanus, does
the Canadian Arctic Archipelago have both species of Juncus arcticus. (386)
Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder Commeliniflorae. (405)
Dahlgren's Order Cyperales. (421) 400 species. (422) 8 genera. (428) Possibly
10 records. (431) Code used for graphics files: juarar.


Juncus arcticus subsp. alaskanus <Hultén>

      (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (8) Juncus balticus var. alaskanus (Hultén)
Porsild. (11) Plants 10-30(-50) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (21)
Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal
stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous, or stoloniferous <stout horizontal root stocks
from which arise stems growing in more of less straight rows>. (32) Stems
erect. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (83) Leaves mostly basal.
(84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 1.5-3 cm long. (90)
Leaves 0.8-1.3 mm wide <in diameter>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (105) Leaf
blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (133) Leaf apices acute.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145)
Flowering stem 0.3-0.7 cm long. (150) Inflorescence axillary <lateral, at the
base of a leaf 2-7 cm long>. (151) Inflorescence fasciculate <loosely so>.
(160) Inflorescence 0.1-0.3 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 3-8.
(193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 3.
(256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals brown. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals
scarious. (266) Petals 3. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals brown <and
scarious>. (270) Petals lanceolate <tips acute>. (271) Petals unlobed. (272)
Petals 3-4 mm long. (274) Petals shorter than the calyx. (277) Stamens 6.
(278) Stamens free. (296) Ovary superior. (308) Styles completely fused. (309)
Styles 1. (317) Ovules 70-100. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit obovate.
(327) Fruit 3-4 mm long. (328) Fruit 1-2 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit black, or brown. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335)
Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds 70-100. (357) Seeds 0.4-0.6 mm long.
(358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 80. (364) North American
<endemic>. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Banks, or Victoria <western
Arctic>. (373) Substrate type: halophytic <sand or clay>. (385) Is this still
distinguished from subsp. arcticus. (386) Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388)
Dahlgren's Superorder Commeliniflorae. (405) Dahlgren's Order Cyperales. (421)
400 species. (422) 8 genera. (428) Possibly 5 western CAA records. (431) Code
used for graphics files: juaral.


Juncus biglumis <L.>

      (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (8) No synonymy in Kartesz (1994.). (11)
Plants 3-20(-25) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted.
(21) Plants with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (32) Stems
erect <usually longer than the leaves>. (36) Stems glabrous. (82) Leaves
marcescent <scale leaves rare and inconspicuous>. (83) Leaves mostly basal.
(84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 1-8 cm long. (90)
Leaves 0.4-1.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (105) Leaf blades glabrous.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (133) Leaf apices acute. (135) Flowering
stems with leaves <closely associated with the flowers, dark brown, leafy 1-3
cm long>. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 0-0.2 cm long.
(150) Inflorescence terminal <subtended by a leaf-like bract>. (151)
Inflorescence fasciculate. (160) Inflorescence 0-0.1 cm long. (192) Flowers
per inflorescence 1-3(-4). (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or
length <clusters of flowers to 5 mm in diameter>. (255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals
free. (258) Sepals brown. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals scarious. (266)
Petals 3. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals brown <and scarious>. (270) Petals
lanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 3-3.5 mm long. (274) Petals
same length as the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (296) Ovary
superior. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (313) Stigmas per
style 3. (317) Ovules 20-30. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit obovate <with
a distinct hollow at the apex when mature. this contrasts with J. albescens>.
(327) Fruit 3-4 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5-2.5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331)
Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish, or brown. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334)
Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting, or styles not
persistent. (356) Seeds 10-30. (360) 2n = 120. (364) Circumpolar. (365)
Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or
Banks, or Victoria. (374) Moist areas, or rocky sites <river gravels and
sands>. (384) An unusual specimen from Ward Hunt Island 83°N has leaves longer
that the flowering stems. CAN 234211. (385) Porsild 1957. A well accepted
name. (386) Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder
Commeliniflorae. (405) Dahlgren's Order Cyperales. (421) 400 species. (422) 8
genera. (428) Widespread, probably 50-100 records. (431) Code used for
graphics files: jujubi.


Juncus castaneus <Sm.>

      (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (8) Subsp. castaneus var. castaneus var.
pallidus Hook. ex Buch. (11) Plants 10-30(-50) cm high. (14) Plants perennial
herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal
stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous <slender>. (32)
Stems erect. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (89)
Leaves 3-10(-30) cm long. (90) Leaves 1-4 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (133) Leaf
apices acute. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems
glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 0.5-5 cm long. (150) Inflorescence terminal <in
the axil of a flat, green leaf 1-6 cm long>. (151) Inflorescence fasciculate
<in 1-3 heads>. (160) Inflorescence 0.1-0.3 cm long. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence 4-10 <cluster>. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter
or length <in clusters 0.8-1.2 cm in diameter>. (255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals
free. (258) Sepals brown. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals scarious. (266)
Petals 3. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals brown. (270) Petals lanceolate.
(271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 5-6.5 mm long. (274) Petals same length as
the calyx <or slightly shorter>. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free <anthers
1-1.5 mm long>. (296) Ovary superior. (308) Styles completely fused. (309)
Styles 1. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit
elongate-cylindrical <with an acute top>. (327) Fruit 5-8 mm long. (328) Fruit
2-3 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit black, or
brown. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356)
Seeds 25-35. (357) Seeds 2-3.5 mm long <lanceolate, 1-3 mm wide>. (358) Seeds
brown <pallid>. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 60. (364) Circumpolar. (365)
Arctic, or low arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common.
(371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere <new records since
Porsild 1957>. (374) Wet meadows, or moist areas <wet sand or clay on lake
shores or by brooks>. (385) Porsild (1957). Two subspecies and two varities of
subsp. castaneus are recongized by Kartesz (1994). (386) Subclass
Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder Commeliniflorae. (405) Dahlgren's
Order Cyperales. (421) 400 species. (422) 8 genera. (428) 10-20 south eastern
CAA. (431) Code used for graphics files: jujucs.


Juncus trifidus <L.>

      (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (8) Two subsp. synonynoms from collections
further south Kartesz (1994). (11) Plants 10-20(-30) cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (21) Plants with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants
rhizomatous <short and with numerous yellowish-brown and somewhat lustrous,
fibrous sheaths>. (32) Stems erect <stiff and wiry>. (36) Stems glabrous. (57)
Petioles absent. (83) Leaves mostly basal <culms leafy with leaves leaves
subtending the inflorescences>. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple.
(89) Leaves 2-6 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.4-0.8 mm wide <filiform>. (93) Leaf
blades linear. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel.
(133) Leaf apices acute. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering
stems glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 0.05-0.1 cm long. (149) Flowers solitary
<occasionally>, or in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal <subtended
by 2-3 leaves that extend well beyond the inflorescences>. (151) Inflorescence
fasciculate <if applicable>. (160) Inflorescence 0-0.6 cm long. (192) Flowers
per inflorescence 1-5. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or
length. (255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals brown. (259) Sepals
glabrous. (261) Sepals scarious. (266) Petals 3. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals brown <and scarious>. (270) Petals lanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed.
(272) Petals 2.4-2.8 mm long. (274) Petals same length as the calyx <or
slightly shorter>. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (296) Ovary superior.
(308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (313) Stigmas per style 3.
(317) Ovules 15-25. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical
<with a pointed top>. (327) Fruit 2.5-3.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 1-1.5 mm wide.
(330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (356) Seeds 15-25. (358) Seeds brown <yellowish>. (359) Seeds
smooth. (360) 2n = 30. (364) Amphi-Atlantic. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of
limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin. (374) Rocky sites <dry sandy or gravelly places>. (385)
Porsild 1957. (386) Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder
Commeliniflorae. (405) Dahlgren's Order Cyperales. (421) 400 species. (422) 8
genera. (428) 2 southern Baffin records. (431) Code used for graphics files:
jujutr.


Luzula <DC.>

      (1) Wood rush. (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (9) Plants bisexual. (11)
Plants 2.5-35 cm high. (12) Plants herbs. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants tufted, or in basal rosettes. (17) Plants not vegetatively
proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (21) Plants with conspicuously
long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants
rhizomatous. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles present, or
absent. (82) Leaves deciduous, or marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal, or
distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 1-15 cm
long. (90) Leaves 0.6-35 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous, or hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs
equally dense on both surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched.
(119) Leaf blade venation pinnate, or parallel. (132) Leaf margins with hairs,
or without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute, or rounded. (134) Conspicuous
hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems
glabrous. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers in
inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence spicate, or
paniculate, or cymose, or fasciculate. (159) Inflorescence without bulbils.
(160) Inflorescence 0-8 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 5-10. (193)
Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (195) Flowers bisexual.
(196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 3. (256)
Sepals free. (258) Sepals brown. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals
herbaceous, or scarious. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present.
(266) Petals 1, or 3. (267) Petals free, or both free and fused. (268) Petals
brown. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals ovate, or
lanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 1.8-2 mm long. (273) Petals not
spurred. (274) Petals same length as the calyx, or longer than the calyx.
(277) Stamens 3, or 6. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in
length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294)
Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 3. (296) Ovary superior. (307) Styles
present. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (313) Stigmas per
style 3. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit
1.3-6 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.4-3.5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent, or indehiscent. (332) Fruit brown. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334)
Fruit calyx persisting, or calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting, or styles not persistent. (356) Seeds 3. (357) Seeds 0.9-1.6 mm
long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 24, or 36. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands, or of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands, or neither
wide-ranging nor of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common,
or uncommon. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere, or Axel
Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or Victoria, or Somerset.
(373) Substrate type: acidic. (374) Wet meadows, or moist areas, or hummocks,
or rocky sites. (385) Represented by four species in the Canadian Arctic.
(386) Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder Commeliniflorae.
(405) Dahlgren's Order Cyperales. (421) 400 species. (422) 8 genera. (424)
Morphological data coded. (425) Genus. (426) Accepted in this study. (428)
100-120 records. (431) Code used for graphics files: julu.


Luzula arctica <Blytt>

      (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (8) Juncoides arcticum (Blytt) Coville.
Juncoides hyperboreum (R. Br.) Sheldon. Luzula hyperborea R. Br., pro parte.
Luzula nivalis R. Br. (Laestad.) Beurling. (11) Plants (2.5-)5-25(-30) cm
high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (21) Plants with short
horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems
glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves marcescent <persiting for many
years>. (83) Leaves mostly basal <but also on the flowering stems>. (84)
Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple <flat>. (89) Leaves 4-12(-15) cm long.
(90) Leaves 1.5-3(-4) mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (132) Leaf margins with hairs <hairs white>. (133) Leaf
apices rounded <blunt and calloused>. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136)
Flowering stems glabrous. (151) Inflorescence fasciculate <the subtending
bracts leafy>. (160) Inflorescence 0-0.3 cm long <subtended by a leaf bract>.
(192) Flowers per inflorescence 5-120 <flowers in 2-7 clusters>. (193) Flowers
small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length <clusters of flowers to 1.5 cm in
diameter. Each flower subtended by bracts with torn (Lacerate) margins that
may look like curly hairs>. (255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals
brown <ovate or lanecolate>. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals scarious.
(266) Petals 3. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals brown <scarious>. (270) Petals
ovate, or lanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 1.8-2 mm long. (274)
Petals same length as the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (296) Ovary superior. (308)
Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (317)
Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit 2-6 mm long.
(328) Fruit 2.5-3.5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332)
Fruit brown. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting.
(356) Seeds 3. (357) Seeds 1.2-1.4 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds
smooth. (360) 2n = 24. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in
the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or
Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or
Victoria. (374) Hummocks <not too dry tundra; frequently on snow beds>. (375)
Substrate imperfectly drained, or on seepage slopes, or dry <occasionally on
slopes>. (376) Substrate acidic <ocassionally; granite and acidic sandstone>,
or calcareous. (377) Substrate gravel, or sand, or silt, or clay, or till, or
moss <in damp places>. (378) Substrate with low organic content, or with high
organic content <over sand on beach ridges>. (379) Wet meadows, or snow beds,
or around the margins of ponds, or marshes, or along streams, or river
terraces <and deltas>, or lake shores <lowlands or slopes>, or tundra, or
slopes, or ridges <on shallow beach ridges or swales; also on drumlin ridges>.
(380) Often locally abundant, Luzula arctica occurs in a wide range of
altitude ranging from the third tier of coastal beaches, to alpine meadows as
high as 2500' above sea level. On the slopes of shallow beach ridges, it is
found in wet Carex, Eriophorum, or grassy meadows. On damp slopes, it grows
with Ledum, Dryas, Salix arctica, and Luzula confusa. When it occurs together
with L. confusa, it seems to occupy the moister areas. In snow bed
communities, a common associate is Cassiope tetragona. In floodplains, it has
been reported in mostly gravelly meadows with Carex and Salix. (385) In
Porsild 1957 as L. nivalis. (386) Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's
Superorder Commeliniflorae. (405) Dahlgren's Order Cyperales. (428) Widespread
with numerous records guestimate 50. (431) Code used for graphics files:
juluar.


Luzula confusa <Lindeberg>

      (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (8) Juncoides hyperboreum (R.Br.) Sheldon,
pro parte. Luzula hyperborea R. Br., pro parte. (11) Plants 5-30 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <loosely>. (21) Plants with short
horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems
glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (83) Leaves mostly basal <but also present on
flowering stems>. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple <involute and
channelled, ie. veins prominent>. (89) Leaves 1.5-6 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.6-2
mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (118) Leaf
blades hairs simple, unbranched <sparse>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel.
(132) Leaf margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute <involute>. (135)
Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (150)
Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence fasciculate <the subtending bract
short and scale-like>. (160) Inflorescence 0.6-1 cm long. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence 20-80 <sometimes with lateral clusters on short spreading
branches>. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length
<inflorescences 10-15 mm in diameer, bracts subtending the flowers shorter
than the flowers and hairy>. (255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals
brown. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals scarious. (266) Petals 3. (267)
Petals free. (268) Petals brown. (270) Petals ovate, or lanceolate. (271)
Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 1.8-2.2 mm long. (274) Petals same length as the
calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (296) Ovary superior. (308) Styles
completely fused. (309) Styles 1 <short, less than 1 mm long>. (313) Stigmas
per style 3. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit 1.3-1.7 mm
long. (328) Fruit 1.4-1.6 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent.
(332) Fruit brown. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting
<as a short stump>. (356) Seeds 3. (357) Seeds 0.9-1.1 mm long. (358) Seeds
brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 36. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or
alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands
<Melville, Prince Patrick>, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or Victoria, or Somerset.
(374) Hummocks, or rocky sites <dry turfy places in the tundra, or on rocky
slopes and ledges>. (385) Porsild 1957. (386) Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388)
Dahlgren's Superorder Commeliniflorae. (405) Dahlgren's Order Cyperales. (428)
Widespready with numerous records, possilby 50. (431) Code used for graphics
files: juluco.


Luzula multiflora <(Retz.) Lejeune> subsp. frigida <(Buch.) Krecz.>

      (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (8) Luzula campestris var. frigida Buch.
Luzula frigida(Buch.) Sam. var. contracta Sam. Luzula frigida(Buch.) Sam. var.
fusconigra Celak. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high <usually>. (11) Plants
(4-)15-30 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (20) Roots
pallid-brown. (21) Plants without easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem
scales absent. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not
exposed. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (89) Leaves 20-80 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-3.5 mm wide. (92) Leaf
blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95) Leaf blades straight. (96)
Leaf blades spreading from the vertical. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface
dull. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (112)
Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple,
unbranched. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein
similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat, or
revolute <loosely>. (132) Leaf margins with hairs <sparse, white, 1-7 mm
long>. (133) Leaf apices acute <often with callous tips>. (135) Flowering
stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (138) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence much reduced, or scale-like. (140)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence extending
beyond the inflorescence <usually>. (141) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence 8-20 cm long. (142) Leaf or reduced bract
closely associated with the inflorescence sheathless. (143) Leaf or reduced
bract closely associated with the inflorescence persistent. (150)
Inflorescence axillary. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (152) Inflorescence a
single spike <rarely>, or multispicate. (153) Inflorescence (1-)2-5 spikes.
(154) Inflorescence ovate, or globose or subglobose. (155) Inflorescence
dense. (156) Individual spike(s) ascending, or divergent. (157) Inflorescence
lateral spikes sessile <or subsessile>. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-2 cm long.
(161) Inflorescence 5-20 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous.
(163) Inflorescence main axis smooth. (164) Number of inflorescence branches
at lowest node (1-)2-5. (168) Terminal spike with both sexes in each floret.
(192) Flowers per inflorescence 20-50. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in
diameter or length. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199)
Floral bracts white or translucent. (200) Floral bracts with margins the same
colour as the body of the bract. (202) Floral bracts ovate, or acute. (203)
Floral bracts widest at base. (205) Floral bracts 1-2 mm long. (206) Floral
bracts 1-1.5 mm wide. (207) Floral bracts hairy mainly at apex. (208) Floral
bracts hairs sparse. (209) Floral bracts straight. (256) Sepals free. (257)
Sepals 2-3 mm long. (258) Sepals brown <black>. (261) Sepals scarious. (266)
Petals 3. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals brown <black>. (270) Petals
lanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 2-3 mm long. (274) Petals same
length as the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (285) Anthers
0.5-0.7 mm long. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 3. (296) Ovary
superior. (297) Ovaries ovate. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (308) Styles partially
fused. (309) Styles 3. (310) Styles 1.5-2 mm long. (313) Stigmas per style 1.
(317) Ovules 3. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit 1.5-2 mm
long. (328) Fruit 1-1.5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332)
Fruit black, or brown. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (356) Seeds 3. (357)
Seeds 0.8-1.1 mm long. (358) Seeds black. (359) Seeds ridged. (364) North
American <and Greenland>. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in
the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or
Canada. (370) USA: Alaska. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Beekman Peninsula and
Frobisher Bay, Ogac Lake>. (384) Anticipated by Porsild (1957); reported for
Baffin Island, Ogac Lake, by McLaren (1964). Also recorded for Baffin Island,
Beekman Peninsula. (385) Anticipated by Porsild (1957); reported for Baffin
Island, Ogac Lake, by McLaren (1964). Also recorded for Baffin Island, Beekman
Peninsula. (428) Anticipated by Posild, now recorded for Baffin Island. (431)
Code used for graphics files: julumu.


Luzula spicata <(L.) DC.>

      (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (8) Juncoides spicatum (L.) Kuntze. (11)
Plants (5-)15-25 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (32) Stems erect
<inflorescenc nodding>. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (83) Leaves
mostly basal <but also present on the flowering stems>. (84) Leaves alternate.
(87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 1-8 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.7-2.8 mm wide. (93)
Leaf blades linear. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (118) Leaf blades hairs
simple, unbranched <sparse>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (132) Leaf
margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute <involute>. (135) Flowering stems
with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (149) Flowers in inflorescences.
(151) Inflorescence spicate <interrupted spike-like clusters subtended by a
narrow leafy bract>. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-1.5 cm long. (193) Flowers small,
less than 5 mm in diameter or length <subtending bracts as long or longer than
the flowers>. (255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals brown. (259)
Sepals glabrous <subtending bracts with long white hairs>. (261) Sepals
scarious. (266) Petals 3. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals brown <scarious>.
(271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 4-5 mm long <with bristle tips>. (274)
Petals same length as the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens free. (295)
Carpels 3. (296) Ovary superior. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles
1. (313) Stigmas per style 3. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326)
Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit 1.3-1.6 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5-1.7 mm wide. (330)
Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds 3. (357) Seeds 1.3-1.6
mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 24. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic <with several large gaps>. (366) Of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin. (374) Hummocks, or rocky sites <dry sunny slopes like the south facing
slope near Apex, Baffin Island, or rocky slopes such as gull cliffs>. (380)
Northernmost record Beekman Peninsula 63°24'N, 64°40'W. CAN 283999. (385)
Porsild 1957. (386) Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder
Commeliniflorae. (405) Dahlgren's Order Cyperales. (428) Southern Baffin
possibly 5 records. (431) Code used for graphics files: julusp.


Luzula wahlenbergii <Rypr.>

      (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (8) No synonymy given in Kartesz (1994). (11)
Plants 15-35 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (21) Plants with short
horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems
glabrous. (83) Leaves mostly basal <but also present on the flowering stems>.
(84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 5-10 cm long. (90)
Leaves 25-35 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (105) Leaf blades glabrous.
(119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (126) Leaf blades revolute <at the tips>,
or flat. (133) Leaf apices acute. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136)
Flowering stems glabrous. (151) Inflorescence paniculate, or cymose
<slightly>. (160) Inflorescence 3-8 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence
20-60. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length <bracts
subtending the flowers glabrous>. (255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals free. (258)
Sepals brown. (261) Sepals scarious. (266) Petals 1. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals brown. (272) Petals 1.9-2.1 mm long. (274) Petals same length as the
calyx. (277) Stamens 3 <? opposite the petals>. (278) Stamens free. (296)
Ovary superior. (308) Styles completely fused. (309) Styles 1. (313) Stigmas
per style 3. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327)
Fruit 2.4-2.6 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5-1.8 mm wide. (331) Fruit indehiscent.
(332) Fruit brown. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (360) 2n = 24. (366) Of
limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common <where it occurs>.
(371) Arctic Islands: Baffin <Southampton Island and Melville Peninsula>.
(373) Substrate type: acidic <to neutral>. (374) Wet meadows, or moist areas
<in sphagnum bogs and in moss by brooks or lakeshores; wet slopes below
snowbeds; in low wet Arctagrostis meadows; among large boulders on sandy silt
near a Pucinellia phryganodes meadow. CAN 520296>. (380) Northernmost record
Baffin Island, Pangmirtung, 66°08'N, 65°41'W. (385) Porsild 1957. (386)
Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder Commeliniflorae. (405)
Dahlgren's Order Cyperales. (428) Southern Baffin possibly 5 records. (431)
Code used for graphics files: juluwa.


Luzula nivalis <(Laesr.) Beurl.>

      (2) Juncaeae, rush family. (8) =Luzula arctica subsp. arctica. (385)
Name used in Porsild 1957. Now Luzula arctica Blyt. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: juluni.


Lentibulariaceae <L.C. Richard>

      (1) Bladderwort family. (2) Lentibulariaceae, bladderwort family. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Lamiflorae. (402)
Dahlgren's Order Scrophulariales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Asteridae. (412)
Cronquist's Order Scrophulariales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Asteridae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Laminae. (420) Takhtajan's Order Scrophulariales. (421)
245 species. (422) 3-4 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Pinguicula. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (425) Class. (431) Code used for graphics files:
le.


Pinguicula vulgaris <L.>

      (1) Butterwort. (2) Lentibulariaceae, bladderwort family. (8) Pinguicula
vulgaris var. americana Gray. (11) Plants 5-10(-15) cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils <but
insectivorous!>. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect <very little true stem
visible>. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves whorled. (87) Leaves simple.
(89) Leaves 0.5-3(-3.5) cm long. (90) Leaves 4-12 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
elliptic, or spatulate <described as elliptic-spathulate; pale yellowish
green>. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or succulent <succulent>. (105) Leaf
blades glabrous <but glandular and sticky on the upper surface which acts as a
trap for small insects. These are held and digested by a sticky secretion from
the glands. Under the microscope the glands appear as small (pimple-like)
bumps on the leaves>. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (125) Leaf bases
rounded <slightly>. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering
stems hairy <with stumpy mushroom-like glandular hairs, seem at 10-40x
magnifications>. (149) Flowers solitary. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm
in diameter or length. (196) Flowers zygomorphic. (256) Sepals fused <at the
base but free at the apex>. (258) Sepals brown <<at least drying brown>>.
(259) Sepals hairy. (261) Sepals herbaceous <glandular>. (262) Sepals
non-accrescent <but becoming more leathery with age>. (263) Calyx funnel-form.
(264) Calyx 5-lobed <the odd sepal posterior>. (267) Petals fused. (268)
Petals purple, or blue. (271) Petals 5-lobed. (272) Petals 8-15 mm long. (273)
Petals spurred <from the lower lip, spur one-third as long as the petals>.
(276) Corolla with narrow tube and spreading lobes <two-lipped>. (277) Stamens
2. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filaments markedly unequal in length.
(296) Ovary superior. (307) Styles absent. (316) Placentation free central <or
almost so>. (317) Ovules <numerous and tiny>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326)
Fruit ovoid <flask-shaped>. (327) Fruit 2-3 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5-2.5 mm
wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit black, or brown.
(333) Fruit hairy <with glandular hairs similar to leaves>. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting. (356) Seeds <seeds numerous>. (357) Seeds <minute, 0.7-0.8 mm long
x 0.2-0.2 mm wide>. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds ridged <honeycomb-like with
glandular hairs>. (360) 2n = <64, 17 counts in Löve and Löve 1975>. (373)
Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Clay. (384) ?. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(402) Dahlgren's Order Scrophulariales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Asteridae.
(412) Cronquist's Order Scrophulariales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Asteridae.
(414) Takhtajan's Superorder Laminae. (420) Takhtajan's Order Scrophulariales.
(421) 245 species. (422) 3-4 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Genlisea,
Pinguicula, Polypompholyx, (=Utricularia), Utricularia. (425) Family. (431)
Code used for graphics files: lepivu.


Liliaceae <L.>

      (1) Lily family. (2) Liliaceae, lily family. (385) Represented by two
species of Tofieldia. (386) Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's
Superorder Liliiflorae. (404) Dahlgren's Order Liliales. (421) 420 species.
(422) 10 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Tolfeldia. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: li.


Tofieldia coccinea <Richards>

      (2) Liliaceae, lily family. (8) No synonymy Kartesz (1994). (11) Plants
5-15 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (21) Plants
with short horizontal stems, or without easily seen horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous <CAN 5417779, rarely collected>. (32) Stems erect <capsules
when mature reflexed>. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves
evergreen <?>. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves
simple. (89) Leaves 1-5 cm long. (90) Leaves 1-3 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
elliptic. (105) Leaf blades glabrous <sometimes minutely scaberulous on
margins>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (133) Leaf apices acute. (135)
Flowering stems with leaves <one or more on purple stems>. (136) Flowering
stems glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 4-12 cm long. (151) Inflorescence spicate
<usually>, or racemose <rarely>. (160) Inflorescence 0.8-2.5 cm long. (192)
Flowers per inflorescence 5-15. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in
diameter or length. (255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals purple.
(259) Sepals glabrous. (266) Petals 3. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals purple.
(270) Petals ovate, or lanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 2-3 mm
long. (274) Petals same length as the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (278) Stamens
free. (296) Ovary superior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 3 <very short>.
(313) Stigmas per style 3. (317) Ovules 15-30. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326)
Fruit spherical. (327) Fruit 1.5-2 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5-2 mm wide. (330)
Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish, or black. (333) Fruit
glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356)
Seeds 15-30. (357) Seeds 0.8-1 mm long <3X longer than wide>. (358) Seeds
brown <golden>. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 30. (364) North American <and
E. Asia>. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367)
Uncommon. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin. (373) Substrate type: calcareous.
(385) Porsild 1957. (428) 5 Porsild records, notibly not mapped from Baffin.
(431) Code used for graphics files: litoco.


Tofieldia pusilla <(Michx.) Pers.>

      (2) Liliaceae, lily family. (8) Narthecium pusillum Michx. Tofieldia
pulustris auct. non Huds. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
5-15(-20) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (20) Roots
pallid-brown. (21) Plants without easily seen horizontal stems. (28) Stem
scales absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the
leaves. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (37) Culm nodes not
exposed. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly
basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 1-6(-10) cm long. (90) Leaves
0.5-1.5 mm wide. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (95)
Leaf blades straight. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical. (104) Leaf
blades adaxial surface dull. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (107) Leaf blades
adaxially glabrous. (111) Leaf blades abaxial surface not glaucous. (112) Leaf
blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120)
Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf
blades flat, or folded. (133) Leaf apices acuminate, or acute. (135) Flowering
stems with leaves <reduced and inconspicuous>, or without leaves. (136)
Flowering stems glabrous. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with
the inflorescence absent. (145) Flowering stem 5-15(-20) cm long. (146)
Inflorescence flowers on pedicels subtended by bracts <short pedicels, tiny
bracts>. (151) Inflorescence fasciculate, or head-like <sometimes with whorls
of flowers>. (154) Inflorescence oblong, or globose or subglobose <Arctic
Islands>. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-2 cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 5-6 mm wide. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 4-7. (193) Flowers
small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers sessile or
subsessile. (255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2-3 mm long. (258)
Sepals green, or brown <pale>. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals petaloid.
(266) Petals 3. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals green, or white, or yellow.
(270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 2-2.5 mm long. (274)
Petals same length as the calyx. (277) Stamens 6. (280) Stamens fused to the
corolla <at the base>. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers yellow.
(283) Anthers subglobose. (285) Anthers 0.2-0.3 mm long. (294) Carpels
completely fused. (295) Carpels 3. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries
glabrous. (307) Styles present. (308) Styles partially fused. (309) Styles 3.
(311) Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per style 1 <each a flat disc>.
(325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit ovoid, or obovate. (327) Fruit 1-2 mm long.
(328) Fruit 1-1.8 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit
brown. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356)
Seeds <<none found>>. (360) 2n = 30. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic.
(366) Neither wide-ranging nor of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands.
(367) Uncommon. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland. (370) USA: Alaska. (371)
Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Victoria. (374) Moist areas <turfy areas in the
tundra and by brooks growing in wet moss>. (385) Porsild 1957. (428) 10
southern Baffin Island mapping records. (431) Code used for graphics files:
litopu.


Linaceae <A.S. Gray>

      (1) Flax family. (2) Linaceae, flax family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rutiflorae. (397) Dahlgren's Order
1 1. Geraniales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Rosidae. (411) Cronquist's Order
Linales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Rutanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Geraniales. (421) 90 species. (422) 8 genera.
(423) Genera in study region: Linum. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425)
Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: ln.


Linum lewisii <Pursh>

      (1) Flax. (2) Linaceae, flax family. (8) Three varieties recognized in
Kartesz (1994). (11) Plants 10-60 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs <base
of plant somewhat woody>. (15) Plants tufted <with several densely leafy
stems>. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems glabrous. (82)
Leaves deciduous, or marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple.
(89) Leaves (0.4-)0.6-1.2 cm long <-2.5 cm long in specimens from Continental
North America>. (90) Leaves 0.5-2.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear. (105)
Leaf blades glabrous. (125) Leaf bases obtuse. (145) Flowering stem 1-2 cm
long <petiole subtending each flower>. (151) Inflorescence racemose <leafy and
often one sided. Pedicels 1-3 cm long>. (160) Inflorescence 2-6 cm long <often
longer in collections from southern Canada>. (192) Flowers per inflorescence
2-6 <to 10 flowers; in our region on condensed spicate inflorescences>. (193)
Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 5. (256)
Sepals free. (258) Sepals green <with conspicuous or narrow transparent
margins>. (259) Sepals glabrous. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals blue <or rarely white, fading to pale yellow>. (272) Petals 5-9 mm
long. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 13. (278) Stamens
free. (295) Carpels 5. (296) Ovary superior. (308) Styles free <except at the
base>. (309) Styles 5. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 2. (326) Fruit
ovoid. (327) Fruit 4-5 mm long. (328) Fruit 4-5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry
<splitting into segments like an orange>. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit
brown <where seeds touch the wall, elsewhere green>. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting. (356) Seeds 10 <with two large seeds per lodicule>. (357) Seeds
2.5-3.5 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = <18, 7
counts in Löve and Löve (1975) for L. lewisii>. (371) Arctic Islands: Victoria
<two records>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous <dry, rocky or gravelly
slopes>. (383) Linum lewisii is in the same family as commercial flax that is
used in the production of linen. The seeds of linen flax (L. usitalissimum L.
are pressed to produce linseed oil. (384) Mosquin, 1971. Needed information
subsp. lepagei Mosquin. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's
Superorder Rutiflorae. (397) Dahlgren's Order 1 1. Geraniales. (406)
Cronquist's Subclass Rosidae. (411) Cronquist's Order Linales. (413)
Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rutanae. (419)
Takhtajan's Order Geraniales. (421) 90 species. (422) 8 genera. (423) Genera
in study region: Anisadenia, Cliococca, Hesperolinon, Linum, Radiola,
Reinwardtia, Sclerolinon, Tirpitzia. (425) Family. (431) Code used for
graphics files: lnlile.


Onagraceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Fireweed family. (2) Onagraceae, fireweed family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Myrtiflorae. (396) Dahlgren's Order
Myrtales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Rosidae. (411) Cronquist's Order
Myrtales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Myrtales. (421) 640 species. (422) 20 genera.
(423) Genera in study region: Epilobium. (424) Morphological data not coded.
(425) Family. (428) Fewer than 100 records. (431) Code used for graphics
files: on.


Epilobium anagallidifolium <Lam.>

      (1) Fireweed. (2) Onagraceae, fireweed family. (8) Epilobium alpinum L.
p.p. Epilogium anagallidifoliumvar. pseudoscaposum ausskn.) Hultén. (384)
Porsild (1957) stated that this species was doubtfully collected from southern
Baffin Island. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under
consideration. (431) Code used for graphics files: onepaa.


Epilobium angustifolium <L.>

      (1) Fireweed. (2) Onagraceae, fireweed family. (8) Chamaenerion
angustifolium (L.) Scop. Chamerion angustifolium (L.) Holub Chamerion spicatum
(Lam.) S.F. Gray Epilobium angustifolium var. intermedium (Lange) Fern. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: onepan.


Epilobium arcticum <Samuelss.>

      (2) Onagraceae, fireweed family. (8) Epilobium davuricum Fisch. ex
Hornem. var. arcticum (Samuelsson) Polunin. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: onepar.


Epilobium latifolium <L.>

      (1) Broad-leaved Willow Herb. (2) Onagraceae, fireweed family. (8)
Chamaenerion latifolium (L.) Sweet Chamerion latifolium (L.) Holub Chamerion
subdentatum (Rydb.) A. & D. Löve. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: onepla.


Orchidaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Orchid family. (2) Orchidaceae, orchid family. (386) Subclass
Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder Liliiflorae. (404) Dahlgren's
Order Orchidales. (421) 17000 species. (422) 850 genera. (423) Genera in study
region: Corallorhiza. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431)
Code used for graphics files: or.


Corallorhiza trifida <Chatelain>

      (2) Orchidaceae, orchid family. (385) Not recorded in Porsild (1964).
(386) Subclass <Recorded by Gould (1997) Can. Field-Naturalist, 111: 471-472.
from two sites in Auyuittuq natonal Reserve, Baffin Island>. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: prcptr.


Papaveraceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Poppy family. (2) Papaveraceaae, poppy family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's Order Papaverales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Ranunculanae. (415)
Takhtajan's Order Papaverales. (421) 200 species. (422) 23 genera. (423)
Genera in study region: Papver. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425)
Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: Pa.


Papaver lapponicum <(Tolmatchew) Nordhagen, Bergens>

      (2) Papaveraceaae, poppy family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora
of North America project: Papaver sect. Scapiflora Elkan; P. sect.
Lasiotrachyphylla (Bernhardi) Pfeiffer. (4) Mus. Årbok 2:45. 1931. (7) Papaver
radicatum Rottb. subsp. lapponicum Tolmatchew P. hultenii Knaben; P hultenii
var. salmonicolor Hultén. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm
high. (11) Plants (5-)10-25(-35) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants tufted <loosely>, or with many stems arising from a caudex <larger
plants>. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously
taller than the leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy, or densely hairy. (58)
Petioles 5-60 mm long <1/2 - 3/4 length of the leaf>. (59) Petioles flat. (60)
Petioles hairy. (82) Leaves marcescent <with numerous, short, dull persistent
leaf bases>. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (88) Leaves
lobed <1-2X,with 2-3 pairs of primary lateral lobes>. (89) Leaves 1-8(-12) cm
long. (90) Leaves 8-20 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades lanceolate <the primary lobes
lanceolate and mostly divided>. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull <green
to gray-green, similar on both surfaces>. (105) Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf
blades with hairs equally dense on both surfaces. (109) Leaf blades adaxial
surface hairs moderately dense, or dense <long hairs>. (110) Leaf blades upper
surface white <or light brown>. (111) Leaf blades abaxial surface glaucous
<slightly>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairy. (114) Leaf blades abaxial
hairs moderately dense. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white <or
light brown>. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade
venation pinnate. (125) Leaf bases obtuse. (126) Leaf blades flat. (132) Leaf
margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices acuminate, or acute, or obtuse
<frequently bristle-tipped>. (135) Flowering stems without leaves <scape
erect, straight>. (136) Flowering stems hairy <glabrate to hispid>. (145)
Flowering stem (5-)10-23(-33) cm long. (149) Flowers solitary. (193) Flowers
medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length <rarely>, or large, greater than
15 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 2 <connate,igloo-shaped, with
specialized margins, enclosing the bud, caducous>. (256) Sepals free. (257)
Sepals 8-12 mm long. (258) Sepals brown. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair
colour brown, or black. (266) Petals 4(-6). (267) Petals free. (268) Petals
yellow <sometimes distally tipped with pink>. (270) Petals obovate. (271)
Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 15-22 mm long. (277) Stamens 30-50 <numerous>.
(282) Anthers yellow. (283) Anthers stout-cylindrical. (295) Carpels 5-7.
(296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries hairy. (301) Hairs moderately dense. (302)
Brown. (303) Appressed. (304) Straight <with thickened bases>. (307) Styles
absent <5-7 stigmas on a convex disc>. (316) Placentation parietal. (317)
Ovules 50-100 <numerous>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit ellipsoid, or
oblong. (327) Fruit 10-20 mm long <1-2.5 times longer than broad>. (328) Fruit
5-9 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown. (333)
Fruit hairy. (356) Seeds 100 <numerous>. (357) Seeds 0.9-1.1 mm long. (358)
Seeds brown. (359) Seeds ridged <reticulate>. (360) 2n = <42,56>. (364)
Circumpolar <possibly>. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or
United States, or Eurasia. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Ellesmere, or Axel
Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Banks, or Southampton. (372) Elevation 0-1000 m.
(375) Substrate imperfectly drained <floodplain terraces and shorelines>.
(376) Substrate calcareous <weakly>. (377) Substrate gravel, or sand, or silt,
or till. (378) Substrate with low organic content. (379) Along streams, or
river terraces. (385) Kiger and Murray (1997) recognized Papaver lapponicum in
a much narrower sense than did Knaben (1959) and they commented that much
further study is needed to assess the relationships of the North American
populations with several taxa from the Russian Far East. These authors noted
that knowledge of P. lapponicum from Greenland, where evidentally it also
occurs, is inadequate to permit an accurate account of its distribtion there.
(431) Code used for graphics files: papala.


Papaver keellei <Porsild>

      (2) Papaveraceaae, poppy family. (7) Papaver macounii Greene subsp.
discolor (Hultén) Rändel ex D.F. Murray. (424) Morphological data not coded.
(426) Status under consideration <indicated as present on Banks Island by
Kiger and Murray (1997)following Porsild (1957>. (431) Code used for graphics
files: papake.


Papaver macounii <Greene> subsp. discolor <(Hultén) Rändel ex D.F. Murray>

      (2) Papaveraceaae, poppy family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by Flora
of North America project: Papaver sect. Scapiflora Elkan; P. sect.
Lasiotrachyphylla (Bernhardi) Pfeiffer. (7) Papaver macounii Greene var.
discolor Hultén P. keellei Porsild P. scammanianum D. Löve. (10) Plants less
than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 20-40 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants tufted. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems
conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy, or densely
hairy <glabrate>. (82) Leaves marcescent <with few persistent leaf bases,
flexible, lanceolate, cliate, glabrous to hispid>. (83) Leaves mostly basal.
(84) Leaves alternate. (88) Leaves lobed <with 2-3 pairs of primary lateral
lobes>. (89) Leaves 4-12 cm long. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull
<green or light green underneath (abaxially), dark green above (adaxially)>.
(105) Leaf blades hairy <trichomes light brown>. (106) Leaf blades with hairs
equally dense on both surfaces <glabrate to densely piolose, trichomes light
brown>. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade venation
pinnate. (125) Leaf bases truncate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (132) Leaf margins
with hairs. (133) Leaf apices obtuse, or rounded. (135) Flowering stems
without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy <glabrate to hispid with appressed
and spreading trichomes>. (149) Flowers solitary. (193) Flowers large, greater
than 15 mm in diameter or length <to 5 cm in diameter>. (255) Sepals 2
<cauducous>. (256) Sepals free. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals yellow, or pink <very rarely>. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals
unlobed. (277) Stamens 30-50 <numerous>. (282) Anthers yellow. (283) Anthers
slender-cylindrical. (296) Ovary superior. (299) Ovaries hairy. (300) Ovaries
strigose <sparsely to densely>. (307) Styles absent <4-6 stigmas on a
conate-umbonate disc>. (316) Placentation parietal. (317) Ovules 30-80
<numerous>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit clavate. (327) Fruit 1.5-2.5 mm
long <capsules more than 4X longer than broad, sparsely to densely strigose>.
(360) 2n = <28,70>. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367)
Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Banks <Three records at CAN>. (379) Tundra
<mesic>. (393) Dahlgren's Order <as P. keellii in Porsild (1957). If this
taxon is recognized at species rather than subspecies rank, the correct name
is P. keelei (Kiger and Murray 1997>. (424) Morphological data coding in
progress. (426) Status under consideration. (431) Code used for graphics
files: pamadi.


Papaver radicatum <Rottb.> subsp. radicatum

      (1) Arctic poppy. (2) Papaveraceaae, poppy family. (3) Nomenclatural
section used by Flora of North America project: Papaver sect. Scapiflora
Elkan; P. sect. Lasiotrachyphylla (Bernhardi) Pfeiffer. (4) Skr. kiøbenhavnske
Selsk. Laerd. Elsk. 10: 455. 1770. (7) Papaver lapponicum (Tolmatchew)
Nordhagen subsp. labradoricum (Fedde) Knaben P. lapponicum subsp. occidentalie
(Lundström) Knaben P. lapponicum subsp. porsildii Knaben P. nigroflavum D.
Löve P. nudicaule L. var. labradoricum Fedde P. radicatum subsp. labradoricum
(Fedde) Fedde P. radicatum var. labradoricum (Fedde) J. Rousseau & Raymond P.
radicatum subsp. occidentale Lundström P. radicatum subsp. porsildii (Knaben)
A. Löve. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high <usually>. (11) Plants 3-15(-17) cm
high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants forming loose clusters, or
tufted, or with many stems arising from a caudex. (18) Taproot present. (21)
Plants with no rhizomes or stollons. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems
conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy, or densely
hairy. (58) Petioles 4-14(-80) mm long <two-thirds the length of the leaf
blade>. (59) Petioles flat. (60) Petioles hairy. (82) Leaves marcescent <with
persistent broadly lanceolate leaf bases>. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84)
Leaves alternate. (88) Leaves lobed <with 2-4 pairs of primary lateral lobes>.
(89) Leaves 2-6(-12) cm long. (90) Leaves 5-15 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
lanceolate <broadly, primary lobes lanceolate or strap-like>. (104) Leaf
blades adaxial surface dull <green on both surfaces>. (105) Leaf blades hairy.
(109) Leaf blades adaxial surface hairs moderately dense <long hairs>. (110)
Leaf blades upper surface white <or light brown>. (111) Leaf blades abaxial
surface not glaucous. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs moderately dense. (115)
Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white <or light brown>. (118) Leaf blades
hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade venation pinnate. (125) Leaf bases
truncate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (132) Leaf margins with hairs. (133) Leaf
apices acute, or obtuse. (135) Flowering stems without leaves <scape erect and
curved, decumbent>. (136) Flowering stems hairy <trichomes light coloured>.
(145) Flowering stem 3-15 cm long. (149) Flowers solitary. (193) Flowers
medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length, or large, greater than 15 mm in
diameter or length. (255) Sepals 2 <cauducous>. (256) Sepals free <more or
less, but with specialized margins, fully enclosing the bud at anthesis,
sepals cone or igloo-shaped>. (257) Sepals 8-12 mm long. (258) Sepals green,
or brown. (259) Sepals hairy <sparsely or densely so, the trichomes light
coloured>. (260) Sepals hair colour brown. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free.
(268) Petals yellow. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals
10-20(-30) mm long. (277) Stamens 30-50 <numerous>. (282) Anthers yellow.
(283) Anthers stout-cylindrical. (295) Carpels 4-7. (296) Ovary superior.
(299) Ovaries hairy. (300) Ovaries tomentose. (301) Hairs moderately dense.
(302) Brown. (303) Appressed. (304) Straight <generally without thickened
bases>. (307) Styles absent <4-7 stigmas on a disc>. (316) Placentation
parietal. (317) Ovules 50-100 <numerous>. (326) Fruit ellipsoid, or obovate
<broadly>. (327) Fruit 5-15 mm long <1-2.5 times longer than broad>. (328)
Fruit 5-10 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown.
(333) Fruit hairy <trichomes brown, generally without thickened bases>. (356)
Seeds 100 <numerous>. (357) Seeds 0.9-1.1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359)
Seeds ridged. (360) 2n = <56, 0>. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic. (366)
Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere:
Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere, or Parry Islands <Melville>, or Banks, or
Victoria <Bathurst, Loughead>. (372) Elevation 0-2300 m. (375) Substrate dry,
or moderately well drained. (377) Substrate rock, or gravel, or sand, or till.
(379) Tundra, or ridges <fellfield, and screes>. (431) Code used for graphics
files: parara.


Papaver radicatum <Rottb.> subsp. polare <Tolmatchew>

      (2) Papaveraceaae, poppy family. (4) Bot. Mater. Gerb. Glavn. Bot. Sada
RSFSR 4: 87. 1923. (7) Papavera cornwllisensis D. Löve P nudicaule L. var.
albiflora Lange P. polare (Tolmatchew) Perfiljev P. radicatum var. albiflorum
(Lange) Porsild. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 3-10(-15) cm
high <CAN 550019>. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <loosely or
densely>. (18) Taproot present. (21) Plants with no rhizomes or stollons. (32)
Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems
sparsely hairy, or densely hairy. (58) Petioles 5-10 mm long <1/2 the length
of the leaf>. (59) Petioles flat. (60) Petioles hairy. (82) Leaves marcescent
<with numerous, short, dull persistent leaf bases>. (83) Leaves mostly basal.
(84) Leaves alternate. (88) Leaves lobed <with 2-3 pairs of primary lateral
lobes>. (89) Leaves 1-4 cm long. (90) Leaves 3-10 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
lanceolate <primary lobes broadly lanceolate to ovate>. (104) Leaf blades
adaxial surface dull <green or blue-green on both surfaces>. (105) Leaf blades
hairy. (109) Leaf blades adaxial surface hairs moderately dense <long hairs>.
(110) Leaf blades upper surface white <or light brown>. (114) Leaf blades
abaxial hairs moderately dense. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white
<or light brown>. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade
venation pinnate. (125) Leaf bases truncate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (132)
Leaf margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices obtuse, or rounded. (135) Flowering
stems without leaves <scape curved, decumbent>. (136) Flowering stems hairy
<often densely so with spreading, dark coloured trichomes>. (145) Flowering
stem 2-10 cm long. (149) Flowers solitary. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm
in diameter or length, or large, greater than 15 mm in diameter or length.
(255) Sepals 2 <caducous>. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 8-12 mm long. (258)
Sepals green, or brown. (259) Sepals hairy. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals free.
(268) Petals white, or yellow. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed.
(272) Petals 8-15 mm long. (277) Stamens 30-50 <numerous>. (282) Anthers
yellow. (283) Anthers stout-cylindrical. (295) Carpels 4-7. (296) Ovary
superior. (299) Ovaries hairy <trichomes dark coloured>. (301) Hairs
moderately dense. (302) Brown <dark>. (303) Appressed. (304) Straight. (307)
Styles absent <4-7 stigmas on a disc>. (316) Placentation parietal. (317)
Ovules 30-50 <numerous>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit obovate, or
spherical <subglobose>. (327) Fruit 5-15 mm long. (360) 2n = 84 <as P.
cornwallisensis attribued to G. Knaben (1959) by Löve 1962a, but not
confirmed, Kiger and Murray (1997>. (365) High arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in
the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Devon, or Ellesmere,
or Parry Islands <Melville>, or Banks, or Victoria. (375) Substrate moderately
well drained. (376) Substrate calcareous. (377) Substrate rock, or clay. (379)
River terraces, or tundra. (384) If this taxon as described here is recognized
at species rank, the correct name is P. cornwallisensis D. Löve. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: parapo.


Plantaginaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Plantain family. (2) Plantaginaceae, plantain family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Lamiflorae. (402) Dahlgren's Order
Scrophulariales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Asteridae. (412) Cronquist's Order
Plantaginales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Asteridae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Laminae. (420) Takhtajan's Order Scrophulariales. (421) 270
species. (422) 3 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Plantago. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics
files: pl.


Plantago canescens <M.F. Adams>

      (2) Plantaginaceae, plantain family. (8) Plantago septata Morris. (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 3-25 cm
high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted, or in basal rosettes.
(18) Taproot present. (21) Plants with vertical underground or ground level
stems. (57) Petioles present <gradually tapering into the leaf blade>. (58)
Petioles 2-50 mm long. (60) Petioles glabrous, or hairy <slightly>. (82)
Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves arising singly from creeping rhizomes. (84)
Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 1-9 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.5-8 mm wide. (93)
Leaf blades lanceolate. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical. (97)
Leaf blades herbaceous <a contrast with P. maritima>. (105) Leaf blades hairy
<seen at 10X>. (106) Leaf blades with hairs on the adaxial. (107) Leaf blades
adaxially glabrous. (108) Leaf blades upper surface villous. (109) Leaf blades
adaxial surface hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white <or
translucent>. (111) Leaf blades abaxial surface not glaucous. (112) Leaf
blades abaxial surface glabrous. (113) Leaf blades abaxial surface villous.
(114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface
hairs white. (116) Leaf blades abaxial surface spreading. (118) Leaf blades
hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf
blades midvein conspicuously larger than the lateral veins. (126) Leaf blades
flat. (128) Leaf margins dentate <with tiny teeth>. (129) Leaf margins with
teeth or glands all around leaf. (133) Leaf apices acute. (135) Flowering
stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 4-20
cm long. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (152) Inflorescence a single spike.
(154) Inflorescence linear, or oblong. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160)
Inflorescence 1-4 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-10 mm wide. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence (10-)15-35. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or
length. (198) Floral bracts shorter than the gynoecium. (199) Floral bracts
brown, or white or translucent. (200) Floral bracts with margins, and
sometimes mid-vein paler in colour than the adjacent area of the bract. (202)
Floral bracts ovate. (203) Floral bracts widest toward tip. (205) Floral
bracts 1.8-2.2 mm long. (207) Floral bracts glabrous, or hairy mainly at apex
<on the margins and adaxial surface>. (208) Floral bracts hairs sparse. (209)
Floral bracts straight. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals
1.2-2.5 mm long. (258) Sepals brown <on the midvein>, or white or translucent.
(259) Sepals glabrous. (266) Petals 4. (267) Petals fused. (272) Petals 4-5 mm
long. (275) Corolla 4-lobed. (276) Corolla rotate <free portion of the
corolla>, or tubular <fused portion of the corolla>. (277) Stamens 4. (280)
Stamens fused to the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous <long exerted>.
(282) Anthers yellow <conspicuous at anthesis>. (283) Anthers
stout-cylindrical <apiculate>. (285) Anthers 1.2-2 mm long. (295) Carpels 2.
(296) Ovary superior. (297) Ovaries ovate. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (309)
Styles 1. (311) Styles thickish and short. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (314)
Stigmas slender-cylindrical. (317) Ovules 4. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326)
Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit 2.5-3.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5-2 mm wide. (331)
Fruit dehiscent <circumscissile, ie. splitting around the middle releaseing a
cup-shaped cap>. (332) Fruit yellowish, or brown. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds 4. (357) Seeds 1.5-1.8
mm long. (358) Seeds black, or brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364) North American
<endemic to the northern Cordillera and Mackenzie>. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of
limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (368) Northern hemisphere: St.
Pierre and Miquelon. (371) Arctic Islands: Banks, or Victoria. (431) Code used
for graphics files: plplca.


Plantago maritima L. var. juncoides (Lam.) Gray

      (2) Plantaginaceae, plantain family. (4) Sp. Pl. 114. 1753. (8) Plantago
juncoides Lam. Plantago juncoides var. decipiens (Barneoud) Fern. Plantago
juncoides var. glauca (Hornem.) Fern. Plantago juncoides var. laurentiana
Fern. Plantago maritima subsp. borealis (Lange) Blytt & O. Dahl Plantago
maritima subsp. juncoides (Lam.) Hultén Plantago oliganthos Roemer & J.A.
Schultes Plantago oliganthosI var. fallaxI Fern. (10) Plants less than 15 cm
high <Arctic Islands>. (11) Plants 3-10 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants tufted, or in basal rosettes. (18) Taproot present. (21) Plants
with vertical underground or ground level stems <laxly branched>. (57)
Petioles absent. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal, or arising
singly from creeping rhizomes. (84) Leaves alternate, or whorled. (89) Leaves
1.5-10(-25) cm long. (90) Leaves 0.8-3(-15) mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical. (97) Leaf blades succulent
<slightly>. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (111) Leaf blades abaxial surface not
glaucous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein
conspicuously larger than the lateral veins <in cross section>, or midvein
similar in size to other veins in the leaf <superficially>. (126) Leaf blades
flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (133) Leaf apices acuminate, or acute
<attenuate>. (135) Flowering stems without leaves <the scapes purple>. (136)
Flowering stems hairy <sparsely>. (145) Flowering stem 2-3(-5) cm long. (151)
Inflorescence spicate, or a catkin. (152) Inflorescence a single spike. (154)
Inflorescence linear. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-1.5
cm long <Arctic island specimens; to 3 cm long in Greenland specimens>. (162)
Inflorescence main axis hairy. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 3-15(-20).
(193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (198) Floral bracts
shorter than the gynoecium <at anthesis>, or longer than the gynoecium <at
fruiting>. (199) Floral bracts brown. (200) Floral bracts with margins darker
in colour than the midvein. (202) Floral bracts ovate. (203) Floral bracts
widest toward tip. (205) Floral bracts 2-2.5 mm long. (207) Floral bracts
hairy mainly at apex. (208) Floral bracts hairs sparse. (209) Floral bracts
straight. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2-3 mm long. (258)
Sepals green, or white or translucent. (259) Sepals glabrous. (266) Petals 4.
(267) Petals fused. (268) Petals white. (272) Petals 4-5 mm long. (275)
Corolla 4-lobed. (276) Corolla rotate <free portion of the corolla>, or
tubular <fused portion of the corolla>. (277) Stamens 4 <alternate with the
corolla>. (280) Stamens fused to the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous
<long exerted>. (282) Anthers yellow <conspicuous at anthesis>. (283) Anthers
stout-cylindrical <apiculate>. (285) Anthers 1-1.4 mm long. (295) Carpels 2.
(296) Ovary superior. (297) Ovaries ovate. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (309)
Styles 1. (311) Styles long and thick. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (314)
Stigmas slender-cylindrical. (317) Ovules 4. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326)
Fruit spherical. (327) Fruit 2.5-3.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5-2 mm wide. (331)
Fruit dehiscent <circumscissile, i.e. splitting arond the middle, releasing a
cup-shaped cap>. (332) Fruit yellowish. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335)
Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds 4. (357) Seeds 1.4-1.6 mm long. (358)
Seeds black, or brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (364) Amphi-Atlantic. (365) Low
arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (371)
Arctic Islands: Baffin <two records form near Frobisher Bay>. (377) Substrate
moss <in cracks near high tide line, or occassionally by saline springs
inland>. (428) Single mape dot Frobisher Bay. (429) 4Jan. 1999. (431) Code
used for graphics files: plplma.


Plantago juncoides <Lam.> var. glauca <(Hornem.) Fern.>

      (2) Plantaginaceae, plantain family. (8) =Plantago maritmia L. var.
juncoides (Lam.) Gray. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under
consideration. (431) Code used for graphics files: plplju.


Plantago septata <Morris>

      (2) Plantaginaceae, plantain family. (7) =Plantago canescens. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (431) Code
used for graphics files: plplse.


Plumbaginaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Leadwort family. (2) Plumbaginaceae, leadwort family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Malviflorae. (391) Dahlgren's Order
1 1. Plumbaginales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Caryophyllidae. (409)
Cronquist's Order Plumbaginales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Caryophyllidae.
(414) Takhtajan's Superorder Plumbaginanae. (421) 775 species. (422) 24
genera. (423) Genera in study region: Armeria. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: pb.


Armeria maritima <(Mill.) Willd.> subsp. sibirica <(Turcz. ex Boiss.) Nyman.>

      (1) Arctic thrift, sea pink. (2) Plumbaginaceae, leadwort family. (7)
Armeria labradorica Wallr. Armeria labradorica var. submutica (Blake) H.F.
Lewis Armeria maritima subsp.. labradorica (Wallr.) Hultén Armeria maritima
var. labradorica (Wallr.) G.H.M. Lawerence Armeria maritima var. sibrican
(Turca. ex Boiss.) Hyl. Armeria vulgaris Willd. p.p. (8) Armeria labradorica
Wallr. Armeria labradorica var. submutica (Blake) H.F. Lewis Armeria maritima
(Mill.) Willd. subsp. labradorica (Wallr.) Hultén, Armeria maritima var.
labradorica (Wallr.) G.H.M. Lawrence Armeria maritima var. sibirica (Turcz. ex
Boiss) G.H.M. Lawrence Armeria scabra Pallas subsp. sibirica (Turcz. ex Boiss)
Hyl. Armeria vulgaris Willd. pro parte. (11) Plants 5-30 cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect.
(36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves
evergreen. (84) Leaves whorled. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 0.5-3 cm long.
(93) Leaf blades linear <greyish green, turning deep green after frost>. (105)
Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation inconspicuous. (134)
Conspicuous hydathodes present <water glands>. (135) Flowering stems without
leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (146) Inflorescence without involucral
bracts. (151) Inflorescence head-like <globose>. (193) Flowers medium-sized,
5-15 mm in diameter or length <infloresence 15-25 mm in diameter>. (256)
Sepals fused. (258) Sepals purple <pink>. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals
scarious. (262) Sepals accrescent <becoming membranous and funnel-like>. (263)
Calyx funnel-form. (264) Calyx 5-lobed. (267) Petals fused. (268) Petals
white, or pink. (274) Petals shorter than the calyx. (276) Corolla tubular.
(277) Stamens 13. (278) Stamens free. (280) Stamens fused to the corolla.
(296) Ovary superior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 5. (316) Placentation
basal. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a nut. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit 1-1.2
mm long. (328) Fruit 0.4-0.6 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (332) Fruit brown. (334) Fruit calyx persisting <becoming
membranous and funnel-like which aids seed dispersal by wind>. (335) Fruit
styles persisting. (356) Seeds 1. (383) When a group of Inuit women at
Iqaluit, Baffin Island N.W.T. were asked what they called this plant they
spontaneously replied, “Carnation”. Judith Farrow who reported the incident
was sure that they had equated the flowers of sea pink with the drawings on
the familiar cans of Carnation milk. This species is sold as a garden
perennial in Southern Canada. As it is an attractive and native species to the
North it is potentially a good plant to buy for gardens in areas where it
occurs naturally at the same latitudes. Armeria is a more difficult species to
transplant from local areas as it has a long tap root that is easily damaged
if the plant is dug up from compact tundra. Once the flowering heads have
turned from pink to fluffy white, they may be tested by rubbing them through
fingers to determine if they contain small dark brown nuts. If these are
gathered they could be seeded into ornamental gardens. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Malviflorae. (391) Dahlgren's Order
1 1. Plumbaginales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Caryophyllidae. (409)
Cronquist's Order Plumbaginales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Caryophyllidae.
(414) Takhtajan's Superorder Plumbaginanae. (417) Takhtajan's Order
Plumbaginales. (421) 775 species. (422) 24 genera. (423) Genera in study
region: Acantholimon, Aegialitis, Armeria, Bamiana, Buciniczea, Cephalorhizum,
Ceratostigma, Chaetolimon, Dictyolimon, Dyerophytum, Eremolimon, Ghasnianthus,
Goniolimon, Ikonnikovia, Limoniastrum, Limoniopsis, Limonium, Meullerolimon,
Neogontscharovia, Plumbagella, Plumbago, Popoviolimon, Psylliostachys,
Vasssilczenkoa. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: pbarma.


Poaceae <Barnhart>

      (1) Grass family. (2) Poaceae, grass family. (10) Plants less than 15 cm
high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 0.9-26.66-120 cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted, or forming loose clusters. (21) Plants
with conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems, or
without easily seen horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous, or
stoloniferous. (23) Rhizomes elongate <13/17>, or compacted <10/17>. (24)
Rhizomes 0.3-1.567-5 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales smooth <8/17>, or striate
<9/17>, or grooved <5/17>. (26) Rhizome scales 0.5-15.07-40 mm long. (27)
Rhizome scales glabrous <14/15>, or hairy <3/15>. (29) Prophylls 0.45-10.52-30
mm long. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins <20/28>, or with scabrous veins
<10/28>, or with hairy veins <3/28>. (31) Prophylls with pronounced keels
<12/28>, or lacking pronounced keels <22/28>. (32) Stems erect <40/45>, or
decumbent <11/45>, or prostrate <2/45>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous <44>, or sparsely hairy <3>, or densely hairy
<2>, or scabrous <1>. (37) Culm nodes not exposed <37>, or becoming exposed
<33>. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0 <32/33>, or 1 <33/33>, or 2 <16/33>, or
3 <7/33>. (39) Culm nodes rooting at the lower nodes <6>, or not rooting at
the lower nodes <42>. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72)
Sheaths with the margins fused to the apex <4>, or with the margins fused only
in the lower part <43>, or with the margins not fused <7>. (73) Sheaths
glabrous <43>, or with trichomes <12>. (74) Sheaths pubescent <3/12>, or
hirsute <6/12>, or scabrous <8/12>. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules
0.1-1.897-12 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous <42>, or a fringed membrane <7>.
(78) Ligules glabrous <33>, or hairy <19>. (79) Ligules linear <1/43>, or
lanceolate <12/43>, or ovate-oblong <24/43>, or transversely oblong <20/43>,
or not applicable. (80) Ligules apices acuminate <5>, or acute <23>, or obtuse
<22>, or truncate <19>. (81) Ligules entire <31>, or erose <23>, or lacerate
<16>, or cleft <9>. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal <35/45>,
or distributed along the stems <15/45>, or not applicable. (84) Leaves
alternate. (85) Leaves distinctly distichous <3>, or not distinctly distichous
<45>. (89) Leaves 0.5-7.72-31 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.2-1.686-9 mm wide. (91)
Leaf blades with sheath auricles <6>, or with blade auricles <4>, or without
auricles <43>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud <26>, or folded in bud <22>.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem <31>, or
spreading from the vertical <39>, or divaricate <1>, or reflexed <5>. (107)
Leaf blades adaxially glabrous <27>, or scabrous <17>, or hairy <15>. (112)
Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous <41>, or scabrous <10>, or hairy <4>.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein conspicuously
larger than the lateral veins <15>, or midvein similar in size to other veins
in the leaf <38>. (121) Leaf blades bulliform cells in distinct rows on either
side of the midvein <14>, or without bulliform cells in a distinct row on
either side of the midvein <35>. (126) Leaf blades flat <29>, or involute
<28>, or folded <22>. (144) Flag leaf sheaths inflated <11>, or not inflated
<39>. (151) Inflorescence spicate <3>, or racemose <1>, or paniculate <44>.
(154) Inflorescence linear <20/41>, or oblong <4/41>, or lanceolate <21/41>,
or ovate <19/41>, or not applicable. (155) Inflorescence dense <32/45>, or
diffuse <26/45>. (160) Inflorescence 0.3-5.583-20 cm long. (161) Inflorescence
2-25.31-130 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous <34>, or scabrous
<20>, or hairy <6>. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 0
<3/43>, or 1 <20/43>, or 2 <34/43>, or 3 <25/43>, or 4 <18/43>, or 5 <15/43>,
or 6-7 <5/43>, or 8 <2/43>. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with
appressed secondary branches <33/44>, or with spreading secondary branches
<29/44>. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 0.2-17.06-100 mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches smooth <30/44>, or scabrous <25/44>. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate <44/45>, or sessile <3/45>. (186) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes <43>, or at the base of the spikelet <3>, or
at the nodes of the main axis <2>. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed <45>,
or dorsoventrally compressed <2>. (188) Spikelets oblong <6>, or lanceolate
<26>, or ovate <21>, or oblanceolate <4>, or obovate <8>. (189) Spikelets
1.5-6.097-21 mm long. (190) Spikelets 0.3-2.442-9.2 mm wide. (191) Florets per
spikelet 1-3-10. (212) First glume 0.02-0.9296-4.6 × the length of the second
glume. (213) First glume 0.1-0.5486-1.1 × spikelet length. (214) First glume
0.05-6.454-150 mm long. (215) First glume linear <3>, or oblong <3>, or
lanceolate <37>, or ovate <12>, or oblanceolate <1>. (216) First glume
glabrous <38>, or with trichomes <13>. (217) First glume veins 0 <3>, or 1
<41>, or 2 <17>, or 3 <15>, or 4 <2>, or 5 <1>. (218) First glume margins
glabrous <34/45>, or ciliate <17/45>. (219) First glume apex caudate <2>, or
acuminate <19>, or acute <28>, or obtuse <8>, or truncate <2>. (220) Second
glume 0.4 × as long as the spikelet or less <17/45>, or 0.4-0.9 × as long as
the spikelet <18/45>, or as long, or longer than the spikelet <14/45>. (221)
Second glume shorter than the lowest floret <23>, or almost as long as, or
longer than, the lowest floret <30>. (222) Second glume 0.3-7.046-150 mm long.
(223) Second glume linear <3/45>, or oblong <3/45>, or lanceolate <24/45>, or
ovate <21/45>, or elliptic <8/45>, or oblanceolate <5/45>, or not applicable.
(224) Second glume glabrous <38/44>, or with trichomes <12/44>, or not
applicable. (225) Second glume veins 0 <3>, or 1 <12>, or 2 <10>, or 3 <42>,
or 4 <5>, or 5 <4>, or 6 <1>. (226) Rachilla internode 0.09-1.192-22 mm long.
(227) Rachilla rachilla tough, 1 mm wide or more <2/3>, or rachilla flexuous,
less than 1 mm wide <2/3>. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous <28/41>, or
scabrous <4/41>, or hairy <16/41>, or not applicable. (229) Rachilla
pronounced between the florets <8/40>, or not pronounced between the florets
<37/40>, or not applicable. (230) Rachilla terminating in a well-formed floret
<5/45>, or terminating in a vestigial floret <9/45>, or extending beyond the
uppermost floret <36/45>, or not applicable. (231) Callus differentiated
<23/45>, or not differentiated <28/45>. (232) Callus hairy <23/23>. (233)
Callus hairs 0.05-1.011-3.5 mm long. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the
floret <22/23>, or subequal to the floret <2/23>. (235) Lemma 1.3-4.056-18.5
mm long. (236) Lemma oblong <10>, or ovate <17>, or lanceolate <28>, or
elliptic <4>, or obovate <3>, or oblanceolate <3>. (237) Lemma keeled <20>, or
rounded on the back <32>. (238) Lemma lemma not strongly inrolled <2/3>, or
lemma strongly inrolled <2/3>. (239) Lemma surface shiny <8>, or dull <40>.
(240) Lemma glabrous <15>, or sparsely scaberulous <15>, or hairy <26>. (241)
Lemma with trichomes on veins only <8/30>, or on intervein region and veins
<25/30>. (242) Lemma veins 1 <4>, or 2 <3>, or 3-4 <13>, or 5 <40>, or 6 <7>,
or 7 <4>. (243) Lemma apex caudate <1>, or acuminate <12>, or acute <28>, or
rounded <19>, or truncate <9>. (244) Lemma apex entire <31>, or erose <25>, or
lacerate <6>, or bifid <5>. (245) Lemma apex ciliate <23/44>, or not ciliate
<29/44>. (246) Lemma apex awnless <30>, or awned <20>. (247) Awn arising from
the tip <10/20>, or from below the apex but above the middle <6/20>, or from
the middle or below <7/20>, or from just above the base <3/20>. (248) Awn
0-5.057-60 mm long. (249) Palea well-developed <43>, or vestigial <3>, or
absent <3>. (250) Palea 0.2-3.572-14 mm long. (251) Palea with glabrous veins
<13/43>, or with scabrous veins <22/43>, or with hairy veins <18/43>. (285)
Anthers 0.2-1.665-7 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317)
Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 0.9-2.472-10 mm long. (331)
Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 14-42-88. (373) Substrate type: acidic <8/30>,
or calcareous <10/30>, or halophytic <15/30>, or nitrophilous <3/30>. (374)
Aquatic <1/41>, or wet meadows <3/41>, or moist areas <23/41>, or hummocks
<9/41>, or snow beds <2/41>, or rocky sites <5/41>, or clay <14/41>. (386)
Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder Commeliniflorae. (405)
Dahlgren's Order Poales. (421) 12000 species. (422) 700 genera. (423) Genera
in study region: Alopecurus, Arctagrostis, Agrostis, Calamagrostis, ELymus,
Deschampsia, Dupontia, Festuca, Hierochloe, Phippsia, Pleuropogon, Poa,
Puccinellia, Trisetum. (424) Morphological data not coded <see separate data
base>. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: po.


Agrostis mertensii <Trin.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Linnaea 10: 302. 1836. (6) Type: Mertens
s.n., “in insula Unalaschka” (U.S.A.: Alaska: Unalaska. 1829). Lectotype,
selected by A.S. Hitchcock (1905). (7) Agrostis borealis Hartm., Scand. Fl.
ed. 3. 17. 1838. Type: (Mountains in wet places, Lapland). Agrostis bakeri
Rydb., Bull. Torrey Bot. Club 36: 532. 1909. Agrostis borealis var. bakeri
Ito, Journ. Geobot. 9: 68. 1961. Type: Colorado: near Pagosa Peak, C.F. Baker
150, Aug. 1899. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high.
(11) Plants (5-)7.5-36(-50) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
tufted. (29) Prophylls 4-6 mm long. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins. (31)
Prophylls lacking pronounced keels. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or
oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes becoming exposed.
(38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part. (73)
Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 1.2-2(-4) mm long. (77)
Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong, or
transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices obtuse, or truncate. (81) Ligules
erose. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (89) Leaves 2.5-6(-12) cm long. (90) Leaves 1-2(-5) mm wide <when
flat>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf
blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf
blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to
other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat, or involute. (151)
Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence ovate <pyramidal>. (155)
Inflorescence diffuse. (160) Inflorescence 2-6.5(-10) cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 15-42 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164)
Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node (1-)2-4(-5). (165)
Inflorescence primary branches with spreading secondary branches. (166)
Inflorescence primary branches 10-40 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary
branches smooth. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating
above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets ovate.
(189) Spikelets 2.2-3(-3.5) mm long. (190) Spikelets 0.7-1.2 mm wide. (191)
Florets per spikelet 1. (211) Glumes equal in length. (212) First glume 1-1.1
× the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 1-1.1 × spikelet length.
(214) First glume 2.2-2.8 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First
glume with trichomes <on the vein>. (217) First glume veins 1. (218) First
glume margins glabrous <sometimes sparsely scaberulous>. (219) First glume
apex acute. (220) Second glume as long, or longer than the spikelet. (221)
Second glume almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222)
Second glume 2.2-2.8 mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224) Second
glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 0-1. (231) Callus differentiated
<slightly>. (233) Callus hairs 0.1 mm long <approximately>. (234) Callus hairs
shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 2-2.6 mm long. (236) Lemma ovate. (237)
Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma sparsely
scaberulous. (241) Lemma with trichomes on veins only. (242) Lemma veins 1
<with short excurrent marginal veins>. (243) Lemma apex acute. (244) Lemma
apex entire, or erose. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awned.
(247) Awn arising from below the apex but above the middle <slightly above>,
or from the middle or below. (248) Awn 2-2.5(-4) mm long. (249) Palea
vestigial. (250) Palea 0.2-0.5 mm long. (285) Anthers 0.5-0.8 mm long. (296)
Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327)
Fruit 1.3-1.7 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 56. (373) Substrate
type: acidic. (374) Hummocks, or rocky sites <In dry, rocky, and turfy places
on acid rocks mainly in the Precambrian Shield area.>. (380) Distribution in
the Canadian Arctic Archipelago is limited to southern Baffin Island, Lake
Harbour, Beekman Peninsula, and Cumberland Sound, Frobisher Bay at McCormick
Inlet (but it has not been reported from around Iqaluit, which has been fairly
thoroughly collected). (381) This species is indicative of a warmer, southern
arctic habitat and an early stage of succession as the plants are small,
delicate, and easily out competed by more robust species. (384) In the
protologue of A. mertensii by Trinius in 1836, the name is given as “Agrostis
Mertensii Herb. Acad. Petrop.” and the localities of the species cited as: “In
And. Chil. austr. (Eandem legit b. Mertens in Unalaschka)”. The epithet and
the method of citation make it clear that Trinius was basing the description
primarily on Mertens’s Alaskan specimen, which was designated as “the type
specimen” by A.S. Hitchcock (1905). This is to be regarded as a lectotype -
cf. Art. 9.8 of the Tokyo Code (Greuter, McNeill, et al. 1994). Agrostis
mertensii was also published by Trinius in Agrostol. 2: 85 (1841), a preprint
from Mém. Acad. St. Petersb. ser. 6 Sci. Nat. 4(1): 331 (1845). This was
thought by Hitchcock (1905) and some later authors to be the first publication
and to have postdated the name A. borealis Hartm. The interpretation was
followed by many authors, including Porsild (1957). Dr. J. McNeill, Royal
Ontario Museum is thanked for discussing the synonymy. (385) Agrostis
borealisHartm. The name A. borealis was published in 1838, and used by many
authors, including Hitchcock (1905) and Porsild (1964). However, the name A.
mertensii had been applied to the same taxon in 1836. (428) Checked against
Hitchcock et al. (1969), Flora Europaea; Linnaea reference obtained at GH.
(431) Code used for graphics files: poagme.


Alopecurus alpinus <Sm.>

      (1) Foxtail. (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Sowerby, Engl. Bot. 16t.
1126. 1803. Incorrectly A. alpinus L. (Porsild 1964). (6) Type: Scotland:
Aberdeenshire near Invercauld, northwest sides of Lochnagar, Aug. 1779, R.
Brown s.n. (Holotype BM! Isotype E! Topotype DAO!). (7) =Aleopecurus borealis
Trin. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
6-30 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants forming loose clusters,
or single-stemmed <often reduced to a single culm in the High Arctic>. (21)
Plants with short horizontal stems, or without easily seen horizontal stems.
(22) Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes elongate, or compacted. (24) Rhizomes
1.5-2 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales striate, or grooved. (26) Rhizome scales
10-20 mm long. (27) Rhizome scales glabrous. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not
exposed <in dwarfed arctic plants>, or becoming exposed <in larger plants>.
(38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part. (73)
Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.8-1.5 mm long. (77)
Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules transversely oblong.
(80) Ligules apices truncate. (81) Ligules erose. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83)
Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 10-65
cm long. (90) Leaves 2-4 mm wide. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf
blades linear. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades
adaxially scabrous <or sparsely scaberulous>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein conspicuously larger than the lateral veins, or midvein similar in
size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat <usually, often
rolling on drying>. (144) Flag leaf sheaths inflated <compared with other
arctic species; but described as “scarcely inflated” in Flora Europaea>. (151)
Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence oblong to ovate <very compact,
so that it is compared to a fox’s tail in the common name, awns straight>.
(155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-3 cm long <with numerous,
very short branches>. (161) Inflorescence 5-15 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence
main axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 2-4.
(165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches, or
with spreading secondary branches <very short>. (166) Inflorescence primary
branches 0.5-3 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches scabrous. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating at the base of the
spikelet. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed <strongly so>. (188) Spikelets
oblong, or lanceolate, or ovate. (189) Spikelets 3-5(-6) mm long. (190)
Spikelets 1-1.5(-1.7) mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 1. (212) First glume
1 × the length of the second glume <approximately, equal or subequal>. (213)
First glume 1 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 3-6 mm long. (215) First
glume lanceolate <to broadly acute>. (216) First glume with trichomes <covered
with greyish hairs, especially on the keel, margins fused at the base>. (217)
First glume veins (2-)3(-4). (218) First glume margins ciliate. (219) First
glume apex acute. (220) Second glume as long, or longer than the spikelet.
(221) Second glume almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222)
Second glume 3-6 mm long. (223) Second glume <broadly acute>. (224) Second
glume <long hairy>. (225) Second glume veins (2-)3(-4). (230) Rachilla
terminating in a well-formed floret. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235)
Lemma (2.7-)3-4(-5) mm long. (236) Lemma ovate to lanceolate. (237) Lemma
keeled. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma hairy <towards apex>. (241)
Lemma with trichomes on intervein region and veins. (242) Lemma veins 3-5.
(243) Lemma apex rounded to truncate. (244) Lemma apex erose. (245) Lemma apex
ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awned. (247) Awn arising from below the apex but
above the middle <exserted or remaining within the glumes>. (248) Awn 0.3-0.7
mm long. (249) Palea absent. (285) Anthers 1.5-2.5 mm long. (296) Ovary
superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit
1.5-2 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = <100, 105, 112, 119-122,
130 (19 counts cited in Löve and Löve 1975)>. (373) Substrate type:
nitrophilous <?>. (374) Wet meadows <?>, or moist areas, or clay <this species
occurs as a primary colonizer of disturbed sites with enhanced growth around
snow bed zones, solifluction lobes, animal burrows, bird colonies, and refuse
dumps.>. (380) While the map suggests this species is ubiquitous throughout
the Arctic, it does not compete well in dense Low Arctic tundra. It becomes
common, even dominant, in wetlands of the northwestern Queen Elizabeth Islands
where it occurs on moderately to imperfectly drained silt and clay at nearly
all elevations. (381) The vigour and height of plants of this species strongly
reflect environmental conditions. On disturbed sites around towns in Southern
Greenland plants form dense clumps 30-45 cm high. In the coldest sectors of
the Queen Elizabeth Islands, a plant forms a single culm 10-15 cm high in each
growing season. The “foxtail” heads are characteristic and in sparsely
vegetated areas on Melville Island can be seen from a low-flying helicopter
and used to distinguish relatively dry tundra from wetter Luzula areas. (384)
AsA. alpinusL. in Porsild (1964); that is, the authority for the name was
incorrectly attributed to Linnaeus. Porsild (1964), probably writing from his
experiences in Greenland, suggested that this species is strongly
nitrophilous, and with fertilizer and minimum cultivation, provides good
grazing, yielding short, but nourishing hay. (385) AsA. alpinusL. in Porsild
(1964); that is, the authority for the name was incorrectly attributed to
Linnaeus by Porsild. (431) Code used for graphics files: poalal.


Alopecurus borelais Trin.

      (2) Plantaginaceae, plantain family. (7) Alopecurus alpinus Sm., non
Villars Alopecurus alpinus subsp. glaucus (Less.) Hultén Alopecurus alpinus
subsp. stejnegeri (Vassey) Hultén Alopecurus alpinus var. glaucus (Less.)
Krylov Alopecurus alpinus var. stejnegeri (Vassey) Hultén Alopecurus glaucus
Less. Lopecurus occidentalis Scribn. & Tweedy. (384) Name used by Jack
Gillett. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration.
(431) Code used for graphics files: plplca.


Arctagrostis latifolia <(R. Br.) Griseb.> subsp. latifolia

      (1) Polar grass. (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Ledeb., Fl. Ross. 4:
434. 1852. (5) Colpodium latifolium R. Br., Chlor. Melvill. 28. 1823. (6)
Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Melville Island, W.E. Parry, 1819-1820. (Holotype: BM!
two fragments at LE, Tzvelev 1976). (7) Arctagrostis latifolia var.
longiglumis Polunin, Bull. Natl. Mus. Canada 92 (Biol. Ser. 24): 48. 1940.
Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Baffin Island, Foxe Island, Nettilling Lake, 24 Aug.
1925. J.D. Soper 125636. (Holotype: CAN! Cotype: BM!). Arctagrosits latifolia
subsp. nahanniensis A.E. Porsild, Bull. Natl. Mus. Canada 171 (Biol. Ser. 64):
120. 1961. Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Mackenzie Mountains, Hole-in-wall Lake, lake
shore, in sand, elev. 3800 ft., July 18, 1960. E.W. Arnold 121 (Holotype
CAN!). (8) Colpodium latifolium R. Br. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or
more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 10-95 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants forming loose clusters, or single-stemmed <usually producing only
a single culm per year in the High Arctic>. (21) Plants with short horizontal
stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes elongate. (24) Rhizomes 2-3 mm
wide. (25) Rhizome scales smooth. (26) Rhizome scales 8-30 mm long. (27)
Rhizome scales glabrous. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in
cross section. (36) Stems glabrous <uppermost culm node condensed in lowest
3rd of plant>. (37) Culm nodes becoming exposed <lower sheaths>. (38) Culm
nodes number visible 0-3. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades.
(72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths with
trichomes. (74) Sheaths scabrous <seen at magnification 40× on flag leaf
sheath; uppermost culm sheath longer than the blade>. (75) Ligules present.
(76) Ligules 2.5-5 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous.
(79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices obtuse <broadly>. (81)
Ligules erose, or lacerate. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed
along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 0.6-8 cm long. (90) Leaves
2-4 mm wide <when flat>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades
linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the
vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially scabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface scabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf <mid leaf>. (126) Leaf
blades flat. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence linear, or
oblong, or lanceolate. (155) Inflorescence dense <in plants growing in cold
habitats>, or diffuse <branches spreading and inflorescence becoming stiffly
pyramidal, when plants grow at warmer sites>. (160) Inflorescence 2.5-10(-17)
cm long. (161) Inflorescence 8-26 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis
glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 5 <or more>.
(165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches
<usually>, or with spreading secondary branches <in warmer habitats>. (166)
Inflorescence primary branches 5-40(-65) mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary
branches scabrous. (185) Spikelets pedicellate <3-15(-40) spikelets per
branch>. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets
laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets oblong. (189) Spikelets (3-)4-6 mm long.
(190) Spikelets 1.3-2.4 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 1 <rarely 2>.
(211) Glumes subequal. (212) First glume 0.8-0.9 × the length of the second
glume. (213) First glume 0.65-0.85 × spikelet length. (214) First glume
1.8-4.3 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous.
(217) First glume veins 1(-3). (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First
glume apex acute. (220) Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221)
Second glume shorter than the lowest floret <usually 1 mm or more shorter than
the lemma>. (222) Second glume 2.3-5 mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate.
(224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins (1-)3. (230) Rachilla
extending beyond the uppermost floret <usually, rarely terminating in a
well-formed or a vestigial floret>. (231) Callus differentiated. (234) Callus
hairs shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 3-6 mm long. (236) Lemma
lanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled <thinner in texture towards the apex>. (239)
Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma sparsely scaberulous <similar to lemma
surface>. (241) Lemma with trichomes on intervein region and veins. (242)
Lemma veins 3-5 <lateral veins obscure, not reaching to the apex>. (243) Lemma
apex acute. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma
apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 3.7-5.5 mm long. (251)
Palea with scabrous veins <the appearance similar to the lemma, with a single
keel at one prominent vein and the second vein faint>. (285) Anthers 1.8-4 mm
long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a
caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1.7-3 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 42,
56, and 62 <Tzvelev 1976>. (374) Hummocks, or rocky sites <occurring in a wide
range of habitats and exhibiting considerable phenotypic plasticity that
appears to reflect the warmth and nutrients available in an environment.>.
(380) In the Queen Elizabeth Islands this species is most commonly found in
the warmer sectors where it is a regular, but generally not abundant,
constituent of moderately to imperfectly drained tundra communities, but
rarely a primary colonizer. (381) Culm height in this species appears to be
strongly correlated with environmental factors, particularly temperature.
Plants growing on the sheltered or sunny side of a rocky outcrop may be
conspicuously taller and have more open inflorescences than plants growing in
a colder, north facing adjacent microhabitat. How open the inflorescence
branching becomes also appears to be related to environmental factors. Plants
with larger more spreading inflorescences occur in known thermal oases, for
example, around Burwash Bay, Nettilling Lake, Baffin Island, an oasis that has
been documented by J. Jacobs, Dept. of Geography, Memorial University. (384)
The nematode Anguina agrostis Steinbuck infects spikelets and causes the
ovaries to enlarge and become dark purple (Mulvey 1963). Other parts of the
infected spikelet become atypical. Specimens with this infection are
conspicuous and have been annotated as forma prolifera or forma vivipara, but
these names have no taxonomic validity. Porsild (1964) did not mention var.
longiglumis Polunin, that was described from a thermal oasis on Baffin Island
by Polunin (1940), who also described the species as “an atrocious typus
polymorphous”. Aiken and Lefkovitch (1990) studied the genus, documented
considerable phenotypic plasticity within the species, and found only subsp.
latifolia on the Arctic Archipelago, although subsp. arundinacea (Trin.)
Tzvelev occurs nearby on the North American continent. (385) Arctagrostis
latifolia (R. Br.) Griseb. Porsild (1964) did not mention var. longiglumis
Polunin, that was described from a thermal oasis on Baffin Island by Polunin
(1940). Aiken and Lefkovitch (1990) studied the genus, documented considerable
phenotypic plasticity within the species, and found only subsp. latifolia on
the Arctic Archipelago, although subsp. arundinacea (Trin.) Tzvelev occurs
nearby on the North American continent. (428) Nomenclature from and numbers
checked with Aiken and Lefkovitch 1990. (431) Code used for graphics files:
poarla.


Arctophila fulva <(Trin.) N.J. Andersson>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Gram. Scand. 49. 1852. Incorrectly A.
fulva (Trin.) Rupr. (Porsild 1964). (5) Poa fulva Trin. Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci.
St. Petersburg Ser. 6, Sci. Math. 1: 378. 1830. Colpodium fulvum (Trin.)
Griseb., in Ledeb., Fl. Ross. 4: 385. 1852. (6) Type: U.S.A. Alaska:
“Eschscoltz Bay” L.K. Chamisso (Holotype: LE, according to Tzvelev 1976). (7)
Glyceria pendulina Laest. In Wahl. Fl. Suec., ed. 2: 1088. 1830. Colpodium
pendulinum (Laest.) Griseb. in Ledeb., Fl. Ross. 4: 386. 1852. Arctophila
fulva subsp. pendulina (Laest.) A. and D. Löve, Bot. Not. (Lund.) 114: 49.
1961. Type described from northern Fennoscandia (Tzvelev 1976). Arctophila
fulva var. similis (Rupr.) Tzvelev, Zlaki, SSSR II: 735. 1976. Arctophila
fulva subsp. similis (Rupr.) Tzvelev, Arkt. Fl. SSSR 2: 169. 1974. Type: USSR,
Insula Kolgujew interior 8 VII, Ruprecht, s.n.? (Holotype LE, Tzvelev 1976).
Further synonymy in Tzvelev (1976). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more
than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 10-85 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (21)
Plants with short horizontal stems, or without easily seen horizontal stems.
(22) Plants rhizomatous <in some habitats, rhizomes grow vertically through
very soft mud, producing numerous pale yellow roots at the nodes; when the
plant grows in a colder climate or in firm substrate, the rhizomes are shorter
and oriented more towards the horizontal>. (23) Rhizomes elongate, or
compacted. (24) Rhizomes 1-5 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales smooth. (26) Rhizome
scales 10-40 mm long <disintegrating early>. (27) Rhizome scales glabrous.
(32) Stems erect <somewhat succulent>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming exposed
<rarely>. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-2. (39) Culm nodes rooting at the
lower nodes. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths
with the margins fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75)
Ligules present. (76) Ligules 1.2-5 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78)
Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules apices truncate.
(81) Ligules erose, or lacerate. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (85) Leaves distinctly
distichous <especially on non-flowering culms. The upper leaf blades are
conspicuously longer than the lower ones.>. (89) Leaves 1.8-23 cm long. (90)
Leaves 2.5-6 mm wide. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially
glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein conspicuously larger than the
lateral veins, or midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126)
Leaf blades flat. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (155) Inflorescence diffuse.
(160) Inflorescence 4.5-16.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 50-100 mm wide.
(162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches
at lowest node 1-5. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with spreading
secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 10-100 mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186)
Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally
compressed. (188) Spikelets ovate. (189) Spikelets 4-7.5 mm long. (190)
Spikelets 1.5-5 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 3-5(-6). (211) Glumes and
lemmas rounded on the back. (212) First glume 0.95-1.1 × the length of the
second glume. (213) First glume 0.6-0.65 × spikelet length. (214) First glume
(1.8-)2.5-5 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous.
(217) First glume veins 1-3 <lateral veins faint>. (218) First glume margins
glabrous. (219) First glume apex acute <or subobtuse>. (220) Second glume
0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long as, or
longer than, the lowest floret <but conspicuously shorter than the spikelet>.
(222) Second glume 2.3-5.2 mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224)
Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode
0.9-1.1 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla not
pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost
floret. (231) Callus differentiated <usually with 1-9 stiff hairs>. (233)
Callus hairs 0.2-0.5 mm long. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the floret.
(235) Lemma 2.8-4.3 mm long. (236) Lemma ovate, or lanceolate. (237) Lemma
rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma glabrous. (242)
Lemma veins 3 <sometimes with 2 faint, additional, lateral veins>. (243) Lemma
apex rounded. (244) Lemma apex entire, or erose and lacerate <with age>. (245)
Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed.
(250) Palea (1-)1.8-4 mm long. (251) Palea with glabrous veins. (285) Anthers
1.4-2.5 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325)
Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1.8-2.2 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360)
2n = 42 <Flora Europaea>. (374) Aquatic <growing in shallow water by the edge
of tundra ponds, in clear, shallow ponds, lakes, slow moving streams, or
wetlands close to sea level, in water bodies where ice disappears early in the
summer. Otherwise suitable habitats may be eliminated by the onshore thrusting
of lake ice.>. (380) Circumpolar, Low Arctic; to 64°50'N in Finland. (381)
Plant height varies dramatically with different microhabitats. Plants 1-1.5 m
tall have been observed in the Mackenzie River delta and in drained lake
basins of the Tuktoyaktuk Peninsula, N.W.T. In the High Arctic plants may be
less than 20 cm high and rarely flower. They often occur in similar habitats
to Pleuropogon. They can be distinguished from vegetative plants of that
species by the upper culm leaves that are longer than the lower ones. (384)
Tzvelev (1976) reported thatA. fulva is one of the best fodder plants that is
recommended for introduction into cultivation in the northern-most regions of
the USSR, “as it maintains a high nutritive value even at the fruiting stage
and can be used as a pasture plant for deer even during the winter. The
species is also good fodder for water birds.” Tzvelev (1976) noted that in the
USSR the High Arctic populations of this species, with smaller general
dimensions (10-30 cm tall), narrower laminas and fewer spikelets are separated
as subspecies similis (Rupr.) Tzvelev but are rather only a variety, var.
similis (Rupr.) Tzvelev, to which not only the type of Poa similis but also
the type of Poa remotiflora belong. No attempt to distinguish taxa within
plants of the genus occurring in North America has been made, although
considerable phenotypic plasticity, apparently often related to microclimate,
has been observed. Tzvelev (1976) noted that “the affinity of the genera
Arctophila and Dupontia is confirmed by the existence of the sterile hybrid ×
Arctodupontia scleroclada (Rupr.) Tzvelev, 1973, Novosti Sist. Vyssh. Rast.
10: 91 ( = Poa scleroclada Rupr...) described from the Malaya Zemlya
tundra...but recently also found on the Chukotsk peninsula”. ?? closing quote
inserted my MJD; check position On the basis of spikelet structure, it
occupies an intermediate position between the parental genera. The
intergeneric hybrid has not been reported from North America, but there are
places where the two genera occur together and where the possibility of hybrid
plants should be investigated, for example, on the Tuktoyaktuk Peninsula and
Richards Island at the mouth of the Mackenzie River. (385) As A. fulva (Trin.)
Rupr. in Porsild (1964); that is, the authority name was incorrectly
attributed to Ruprecht by Porsild. A monotypic genus reported to hybridize
with Dupontia in Asia (Tzvelev 1976). (428) This is the name used in Porsild
(1964); further synonymy in Tzvelev (1976). (431) Code used for graphics
files: poarfu.


Calamagrostis canadensis var. langsdorffii <(Link) Inman>

      (1) Canada Blue Joint. (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Rhodora 24: 143.
1922. (5) Calamagrostis canadensis subsp. langsdorffii (Link) Hultén, Acta
Univ. Lund. n. ser. 38: 163. 1942. Arundo langsdorfi Link, Enum. Pl. Hort.
Berol. 1: 74. 1821. Calamagrostis langsdorffii (Link) Trin. Gram. Unifl. 225,
pl. 4, fig. 10. 1824. Deyeuxia langsdorfii Kunth, Rev. Gram. 1: 77. 1829. (6)
Type: “Habitat....” Cult. Berlin. (7) Calamagrostis scabra C. Presl, Rel.
Haenk. 1: 234. 1830. Type: Hab. in sinu Nootka. Vancouver Isl. Calamagrostis
hirtigluma Steud. Syn. Pl. Glum. (or Gram.) 1: 188. 1854. Type: Labrador.
(Mission Albrecht) Groenlandica ? Terra nova. Calamagrostis oregonensis
Buckley, Proc. Acad. Phil. 1862: 92. 1862 (in part, according to Gray, Proc.
Acad. Phil. 1863: 334. 1863). (8) Calamagrostis candensis subsp. langsdorfii
(Link) Hultén Calamagrostis canadensis var. scabra (J.Presl) A.S. Hitchcock
Calamagrostis langsdorfiiI (Link) Trin. Calamagrostis nubila Louis-Marie .
(10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 38-115
cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (21) Plants with conspicuously long
horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous.
(23) Rhizomes elongate. (24) Rhizomes 1.5-2.5 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales
striate <prominent veins>. (26) Rhizome scales 3-30 mm long. (27) Rhizome
scales glabrous. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming
exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-3. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted
into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part.
(73) Sheaths glabrous, or with trichomes. (74) Sheaths hirsute, or scabrous
<tiny scaberules>. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 5-8(-12) mm long. (77)
Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules hairy <abaxial surface>. (79) Ligules
lanceolate. (80) Ligules apices obtuse. (81) Ligules entire, or erose, or
lacerate. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (89) Leaves 15-30 cm long. (90) Leaves 3.5-6 mm wide <when flat>.
(91) Leaf blades without auricles <usually>, or with blade auricles <rarely>.
(92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades
appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades
adaxially scabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface scabrous. (119) Leaf
blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein conspicuously larger than
the lateral veins, or midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf.
(126) Leaf blades flat, or involute <rarely>. (151) Inflorescence paniculate.
(154) Inflorescence lanceolate, or not applicable <pyramidal>. (155)
Inflorescence dense, or diffuse. (160) Inflorescence 10-20 cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 25-86 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis scabrous. (164)
Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 2-4. (165) Inflorescence
primary branches with spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence
primary branches 2.5-7 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches scabrous
<to long hairy>. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating
above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets
lanceolate. (189) Spikelets 3.7-5.2 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.2-3.3 mm wide.
(191) Florets per spikelet 1. (211) Glumes subequal. (212) First glume 0.85-1
× the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.85-1 × spikelet length.
(214) First glume 3.7-4.5 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First
glume with trichomes <trichomes longer on vein(s)>. (217) First glume veins
1(-2). (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acuminate.
(220) Second glume as long, or longer than the spikelet. (221) Second glume
almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume
3.7-5.1 mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224) Second glume with
trichomes. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.5 mm long.
(228) Rachilla internode hairy <hairs 2.5-3.0 mm>. (230) Rachilla extending
beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated. (233) Callus hairs
2.5-3.5 mm long. (234) Callus hairs subequal to the floret. (235) Lemma
2.8-3.8 mm long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma rounded on the back.
(239) Lemma surface dull <scaberulous>. (240) Lemma hairy. (241) Lemma with
trichomes on intervein region and veins. (242) Lemma veins 5 <4>. (243) Lemma
apex acute. (244) Lemma apex erose. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate <except
callus>. (246) Lemma apex awned. (247) Awn arising from the middle or below,
or from just above the base. (248) Awn 2-2.4 mm long. (249) Palea
well-developed. (250) Palea 1.5-2.3 mm long. (251) Palea with glabrous veins.
(285) Anthers 1.8-2.4 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317)
Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1.6-2 mm long. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (360) 2n = 56 <Greene (1984) quoting Tateoka, (1973)>. (374)
Sand. (384) Greene (1980) considered that this variety differs from var.
canadensis in having glumes that are 4-6 mm long, firm, rarely hyaline,
strongly scabrous on the back, often short-ciliate on keel. 2n = 28, 56. A
single record for the Arctic Archipelago was collected from Lake Harbour,
Baffin Island, Polunin 1223, July, 1936. CAN! It was considered C. canadensis
var. scabra (Presl) Hitchc. by Polunin (1940). No supplementary records are
known. (385) The single record in Porsild (1964) from Baffin Island, Polunin
1223, was collected July, 1936. CAN! No supplementary records are known. (431)
Code used for graphics files: pocala.


Calamagrostis purpurascens <R. Br.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) In Franklin, Narr. Journey Shores Polar
Sea, Bot. Appendix 731. 1823. (5) Arundo purpurascens Schult., Mantissa 3
(Addit. 1): 603. 1827. Deyeuxia purpurascens Kunth, Révision Gram. 1: 77.
1829. C. arundinacea f. purpurascens Gelert in Ostenf. Fl. Arctica 1: 103.
1902. C. arundinacea var. purpurascens A.E. Porsild, Meddel. Grønland 47: 261.
1910. (6) Type: Canada. N.W.T.: “the Barren Grounds from Point Lake to the
Arctic Sea,” 1821, J. Richardson s.n. (Holotype: K (not located October 1994)
probable portion of type GH!). (7) Calamagrostis sylvatica var. americana
Vasey, Contr. U.S. Natl. Herb. 3: 83. 1892. Type: U.S.A. Colorado: Pen. Gulch,
Vasey in 1884. Calamagrostis purpurascens var. maltei Polunin, Bull. Natl.
Mus. Canada 94 (Biol. Ser. 24): 51. 1940. Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Baffin Island,
Eclipse Sound, 15 Aug. 1927, M.O. Malte (Holotype: CAN!). Further synonymy in
Greene (1980). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11)
Plants 20-70 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants forming loose
clusters <usually>, or tufted <when stunted and growing in poor habitats>.
(21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal
stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes compacted. (24) Rhizomes 1-2 mm
wide. (25) Rhizome scales striate. (26) Rhizome scales 6-12 mm long. (27)
Rhizome scales glabrous. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in
cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming
exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-3. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted
into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part.
(73) Sheaths glabrous, or with trichomes. (74) Sheaths hirsute, or scabrous.
(75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 2.6-5 mm long <upper leaves have longer
ligules>. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules hairy <puberulent on the
abaxial surface>. (79) Ligules lanceolate. (80) Ligules apices acute, or
obtuse. (81) Ligules erose, or lacerate. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves
mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 3-30 cm long. (90) Leaves 2-8
mm wide <when flat>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107)
Leaf blades adaxially scabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface scabrous.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size
to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat, or involute. (151)
Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence linear <compact and narrowly
pyramidal>. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 3.5-10.5 cm long.
(161) Inflorescence 10-20 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis scabrous.
(164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 2-4. (165) Inflorescence
primary branches with appressed secondary branches, or with spreading
secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 1.5-10(-40) mm long.
(167) Inflorescence primary branches scabrous. (185) Spikelets pedicellate.
(186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally
compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate. (189) Spikelets 5-6.7 mm long. (190)
Spikelets 1-3 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 1. (211) Glumes subequal.
(212) First glume 0.9-1 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume
0.95-1 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 4.9-6.3 mm long. (215) First glume
lanceolate. (216) First glume with trichomes <particularly on midvein,
sparsely over rest of surface>. (217) First glume veins 1. (218) First glume
margins glabrous, or ciliate <minutely>. (219) First glume apex acuminate.
(220) Second glume as long, or longer than the spikelet. (221) Second glume
almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 5-6
mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224) Second glume with trichomes
<scaberulous>. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 1.8-2.1 mm
long. (228) Rachilla internode hairy. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the
uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated. (233) Callus hairs 1-1.4 mm
long. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 4-5(-6) mm long.
(236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled <slightly>. (239) Lemma surface
dull. (240) Lemma sparsely scaberulous. (241) Lemma with trichomes on
intervein region and veins <very short>. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex
acute, or rounded. (244) Lemma apex bifid. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246)
Lemma apex awned. (247) Awn arising from the middle or below. (248) Awn 4.5-8
mm long. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 3.5-4.1 mm long. (251) Palea
with scabrous veins <sparse, minute trichomes>. (285) Anthers 2.2-2.5 mm long.
(296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis.
(327) Fruit 2-2.5 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28, 42, and 84
<<Bowden 1960b: 4 collections 2n = 42>>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous.
(374) Rocky sites <growing on rocky slopes and well-drained sandy soils. “Its
disjunct distribution in widely separated places across eastern North America
may be a consequence of this species’ preference for calcareous soils.
Wynne-Edwards (1937) advanced such an ecological explanation in response to
the contention by Fernald (1925) that such distributions are the result of
pre-glacial survival of plants on nunataks. It seems likely then, as suggested
by Kawano (1965), that C. purpurascens achieved its present distribution in
eastern North America by migrating soon after the retreat of the Wisconsin
glaciers”. Greene (1980).>. (380) Greenland, Eastern Siberia and Alaska but
not in Europe. Occurring on Baffin and Ellesmere Islands, the Mackenzie
District and in Ungava, Gaspe Peninsula, north shore of Lake Superior,
Northern Manitoba. (381) Species indicative of dry, calcareous soils. (384)
The subspecies C. purpurascens subsp. arctica, (Vasey) Hultén was reported in
Hultén’s (1942) Flora of Alaska and the Yukon2: 170, and (Hultén 1968). It is
described as “similar to subsp. purpurascens, but more low-growing: panicle
shorter; glumes thicker, not hyaline; awns narrow, purplish, long-pointed.”
Whether the plants on the Arctic Archipelago should be recognized as this
subspecies has not been investigated. (385) Whether the plants on the Arctic
Archipelago should be recognized as the generally smaller C. purpurascens
subsp. arctica (Vasey) Hultén has not been investigated. (428) Note that in
Intermountain flora, type is (N. British Amer.). Synonymy from Intermountain
flora, more synonymy in Greene 1980). (431) Code used for graphics files:
pocapu.


Calamagrostis stricta <(Timm) Koeler> subsp. stricta

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Descr. Gram. 105. 1802. (5) Arundo
stricta Timm in Siemssen, Meklenb. Mag. 2: 235. 1795. First described from
Malchin, Germany. Not Arundo stricta Gilib., 1792, because the latter was
described in a work not consistently employing binomial nomenclature.
Calamagrostis neglecta var. stricta (Timm) Griseb. in Ledeb., Fl. Ross. 4:
429. 1853. Calamagrostis neglecta subsp. stricta (Timm) Tzvel., Novit. Syst.
Pl. Vasc. 1965. 30. 1965. (6) Type: The location of Timm’s herbarium and type
is unknown (Stafleu 1986). (7) Deyeuxia neglecta var. gracilis Scribn., Bot.
Gaz. 11: 175. 1886. Calamagrostis laxiflora Kearney, U.S. Dept. Agric., Div.
Agrost. Bull. 11: 34. 1898. Not C. laxiflora Phil., 1896. (cited incorrectly
by Kearney as Calamagrostis neglecta var. gracilis). Calamagrostis lucida
Scribn., U.S. Dept. Agric., Div. Agrost. Circ. 30: 8. 1901. Type:
U.S.A.Wyoming: Yellowstone Park, East Fork, meadows, Aug. 1885, Tweedy 582.
(Holotype: US; Isotype: GH). Deyeuxia neglecta var. brevifolia Vasey in
Macoun, Cat. Can. Pl. 4: 206. 1888. Type: Canada. Yukon: near margin of Pelly
Banks, 61°45'N, 31 July 1887, Dawson 96. (Holotype: CAN. Fragment at US! from
CAN). Calamagrostis neglecta var. wrightii Kearney, U.S. Dept. Agric., Div.
Agrost. Bull. 11: 36. 1898. Type: U.S.S.R. Arakamehetchene Island, Bering
Strait, 1853-1856, C. Wright s.n. (Holotype US. Isotype GH.) Calamagrostis
neglecta var. micrantha (Kearney) Stebbins, Rhodora 32: 55. 1930.
Calamagrostis micrantha Kearney, U.S. Dept. Agric. Div. Agrost. Bull. 11: 36.
1898. Canada. Saskatchewan: muskeg north of Prince Albert, Macoun, H.G.S.C.
13111. (Holotype US. Isotype CAN). Calamagrostis micrantha var. sierrae Jones.
Contrib. West. Bot. 14: 9. 1912. Type: 2nd specimen cited: U.S.A. California:
Susanville, below Eagle Lake, 30 June 1897. Jones s.n.. (POM. Duplicate US).
(10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 10-30
cm high <on Arctic Islands, to 90 cm tall further south>. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted, or forming loose clusters. (21) Plants
with short horizontal stems, or without easily seen horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes elongate. (24) Rhizomes 0.5-1.5 mm wide.
(25) Rhizome scales striate, or grooved. (26) Rhizome scales 2-15 mm long.
(27) Rhizome scales glabrous. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in
cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes becoming exposed. (38)
Culm nodes number visible (1-)2-3. (39) Culm nodes not rooting at the lower
nodes. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the
margins not fused. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules
0.75-1.5(-3.5) mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79)
Ligules ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules apices obtuse. (81) Ligules entire
<usually>. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems.
(84) Leaves alternate. (85) Leaves not distinctly distichous. (89) Leaves
(20-)50-150(-300) cm long. (90) Leaves (1-)2-3(-5) mm wide. (91) Leaf blades
without auricles. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially
glabrous <in appearance but minutely scaberulous>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glabrous <in appearance, but minutely scaberulous>. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in
the leaf. (121) Leaf blades without bulliform cells in a distinct row on
either side of the midvein. (126) Leaf blades involute. (144) Flag leaf
sheaths not inflated. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence
lanceolate, or ovate <compact>. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence
(3-)5-12 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-20 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main
axis scabrous <conspicuously so>. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at
lowest node 2-4. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary
branches <usually without secondary branches in the Arctic>. (166)
Inflorescence primary branches (0.5-)1-2(-4) mm long <spikelet-bearing for
over half their length>. (167) Inflorescence primary branches scabrous. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187)
Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate. (189) Spikelets
2-4.5 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1-2 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 1.
(211) Glumes subequal, occasionally hyaline at the margins. (212) First glume
0.85-1 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.85-1 × spikelet
length. (214) First glume 4-5.5 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216)
First glume glabrous, or with trichomes <usually thin and smooth or weakly
scabrous along the keel>. (217) First glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins
glabrous. (219) First glume apex caudate. (220) Second glume as long, or
longer than the spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long as, or longer
than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 4.5-5.5 mm long. (223) Second
glume lanceolate. (224) Second glume glabrous, or with trichomes. (225) Second
glume veins 1(-3). (226) Rachilla internode 0.8-1.1 mm long. (228) Rachilla
internode hairy <hairs 2.5-3.0 mm>. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the
uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated. (233) Callus hairs 1-2(-3) mm
long. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 2-4 mm long.
(236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface
dull. (240) Lemma sparsely scaberulous. (241) Lemma with trichomes on
intervein region and veins. (242) Lemma veins 3. (243) Lemma apex acute. (244)
Lemma apex bifid <notched or 4-toothed>. (245) Lemma apex ciliate. (246) Lemma
apex awned. (247) Awn arising from the middle or below. (248) Awn 4-4.5 mm
long. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 2-4 mm long. (251) Palea with
glabrous veins. (285) Anthers 2-2.5 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309)
Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (331) Fruit indehiscent.
(373) Substrate type: acidic <peaty to sandy>. (374) Moist areas
<Calamagrostis stricta var. stricta grows in moist, peaty to sandy soils in
marshes, poorly-drained tundra meadows and along shores of lakes and streams
(Greene (1980)>. (380) Known from two collection sites on the Arctic Islands.
(381) The recorded distribution of this species (see below) makes it
indicative of the activities of aircraft visiting the area! Aircraft arriving
at Iqaluit, often approach over the Sylvia Grinnell River at a time when the
wheels are being lowered for landing. The location at Mould Bay, reads as
though the plant was collected at one end of the runway located there. This
species would be expected to thrive in many places on the Arctic Islands and
it is surprising that it has not been recorded more frequently. (384) Porsild
(1964) mapped three records of this taxon in the High Arctic, which we still
have not been able to confirm. However, since McLachlan et al. (1989), we have
found two collections from DAO that were annotated by C.W. Greene in 1980. One
collection from Baffin Island, Sylvia Grinnell River, 63°45'N 68°32'W, only
one small colony seen, 25 July 1948, J.A. Calder 2155. (DAO). The other,
mapped as Calamagrostis chordorrhiza Porsild from Prince Patrick Island, Mould
Bay, 76°16'N, 119°05'W, sandy silt slope above shore; forming open stands on
the drier parts of the slope, 28 Aug.1952, P.F. Bruggemann 556. (DAO). (385)
Porsild (1964) mapped three records of this taxon in the arctic islands, which
we have not been able to confirm. Since McLachlan et al. (1989), we have found
two collections from DAO; one from Baffin Island, near Iqaluit, the other from
Prince Patrick Island, Mould Bay. (431) Code used for graphics files: pocast.


Deschampsia cespitosa <(L.) Beauvais> subsp. cespitosa

      (1) Hairgrass. (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Agrost. 91: 160. 1812. (5)
Aira cespitosa L., Sp. Pl. 64. 1753. (6) Type: “Circa acidulum Nartsana.”
(Holotype: LE, Tzvelev 1976). (7) Deschampsia pungens Rydb., Bull. Torrey
Club, 39: 103. 1912. Type: Canada. Alberta: Along stream below warm sulphur
springs, vicinity of banff, July 10, 1899, McCalla 2309 (Type in herb. N.Y.
Bot. Gard, Chase and Niles 1962). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more
than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 13-55 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants tufted. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section.
(36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes number
visible 0-2. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths
with the margins fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75)
Ligules present. (76) Ligules 2-5 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78)
Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules apices acute. (81)
Ligules entire. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (89) Leaves 0.8-4.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-2.5 mm wide <when
flat>, or 0.3-0.8 mm wide <when rolled>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93)
Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf
blades adaxially scabrous <sparsely scaberulous>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat, or
folded, or involute. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence
<pyramidal>. (155) Inflorescence dense, or diffuse <in warmer sites>. (160)
Inflorescence 3-12 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 20-110 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous, or scabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence
branches at lowest node 3-5. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with
spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 7-60 mm
long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth, or scabrous. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187)
Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets ovate to obovate. (189)
Spikelets 4-6 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.8-2.6 mm wide. (191) Florets per
spikelet 2-3. (212) First glume 0.85-0.95 × the length of the second glume.
(213) First glume 0.8-0.85 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 3.2-5.1 mm
long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First
glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex
acute. (220) Second glume as long, or longer than the spikelet. (221) Second
glume almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume
3.6-5.4 mm long. (223) Second glume ovate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225)
Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 1-1.6 mm long. (228) Rachilla
internode hairy. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230)
Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated.
(233) Callus hairs 1-1.5 mm long. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the floret.
(235) Lemma 3-3.8 mm long. (236) Lemma oblong. (237) Lemma keeled. (239) Lemma
surface shiny. (240) Lemma glabrous. (242) Lemma veins 5 <lateral veins
faint>. (243) Lemma apex rounded, or truncate. (244) Lemma apex erose. (245)
Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awned. (247) Awn arising from just
above the base. (248) Awn 2-3.5 mm long. (249) Palea well-developed. (250)
Palea 2.7-3.3 mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous veins. (285) Anthers 1.5-2.1
mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a
caryopsis. (327) Fruit 2.3-3 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 26,
27, and 28 <Bowden 1960b>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous <in calcareous,
sandy and rocky places, often in the centre of dry, otherwise bare polygons>.
(374) Rocky sites. (380) In North America, this species has an arctic and
alpine distribution but is uncommon in the High Arctic, although known from
Melville Island and the Hazen Plateau of Ellesmere Island. It also occurs in
Greenland, eastern Siberia and elsewhere in Asia, but not in Europe. (381)
Species indicative of dry calcareous soils. (384) This taxon was considered
part of a D. cespitosa “complex” by Kawano (1963, 1966) who investigated the
cytogeography and evolution of members of it from many parts of the world
including the Canadian Arctic. He reported on the hypothetical relationships
of members of the D. cespitosa complex with chromosome numbers ranging from
2n= 26, 28, 35, 38, 39, 41, 49, 52, and 56 and noted that Tateoka (1955) and
Bowden (1960b?) had reported the existence of “B” or supernumerary chromosomes
in D. cespitosa. This taxon was spelt D. caespitosa with “caes” in Porsild
(1964), but “ces” in the original description. Porsild (1964) recognized this
species and three other taxa within the genus Deschampsia, i.e. D. alpina (see
excluded taxa), D. brevifolia (see D. caespitosa subsp. brevifolia), and D.
pumila (see D. paramushirensis). (385) As D. caespitosa with “caes” in Porsild
(1964), but “ces” in the original description. Porsild (1964) recognized this
species and three other taxa within the genus Deschampsia, i.e. D. alpina (see
excluded taxa), D. brevifolia (see D. caespitosa subsp. brevifolia), and D.
pumila (see D. paramushirensis). (431) Code used for graphics files: podece.


Deschampsia cespitosa subsp. brevifolia <(R. Br.) Tzvelev>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) In Tolmachev, Fl. Sev. Vost. Europ.
Chasti SSSR 1: 141. 1974. (5) D. brevifolia R. Br. in Chlor. Melvill. 33.
1823. (6) Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Melville Island, 1819-1820, W. E. Parry.
(Holotype: K; two Isotypes: LE (Tzvelev 1976); Topotype: DAO!). (10) Plants
less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants tufted. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming
exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-2. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted
into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part.
(73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 1.3-3.1 mm long.
(77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong.
(80) Ligules apices acuminate, or acute. (81) Ligules entire. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves
0.5-3(-6.5) cm long. (90) Leaves 0.4-0.8 mm wide <when rolled>. (92) Leaf
blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to
the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially
glabrous, or hairy <with sparse minute trichomes>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat
<rarely>, or folded, or involute. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154)
Inflorescence lanceolate, or ovate <compact>. (155) Inflorescence dense, or
diffuse <occasionally>. (160) Inflorescence 1.5-10 cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 5-20 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164)
Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 3-5. (165) Inflorescence
primary branches with appressed secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence
primary branches 1-36 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth.
(185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes.
(187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets ovate to obovate. (189)
Spikelets 2.3-5 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.4-4 mm wide. (191) Florets per
spikelet 2(-3). (212) First glume 0.9-1.2 × the length of the second glume.
(213) First glume 0.9-1 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 2.7-4 mm long.
(215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume
veins 1. (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acuminate.
(220) Second glume as long, or longer than the spikelet. (221) Second glume
almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 3-4
mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225)
Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.5-1.4 mm long. (228) Rachilla
internode hairy. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230)
Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated.
(233) Callus hairs 0.3-0.4 mm long. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the
floret. (235) Lemma 2.8-4 mm long. (236) Lemma oblong, or lanceolate. (237)
Lemma keeled. (239) Lemma surface shiny. (240) Lemma glabrous. (242) Lemma
veins 5. (243) Lemma apex acute, or rounded, or truncate. (244) Lemma apex
erose, or lacerate. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awned.
(247) Awn arising from the middle or below <rarely higher up>. (248) Awn 1-2.2
mm long. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 2.4-3.3 mm long. (251) Palea
with scabrous veins <trichomes sparse>. (285) Anthers 1.5-2.5 mm long. (296)
Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (331)
Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 26 <Mulligan and Porsild (1969), specimen from
the Oglivie Mountains, Yukon. These authors commented that plants of this
species from Southampton Island, Canada, and Greenland have the same
chromosome number according to Holmen (1952), Jorgensen et al. (1958), Bowden
(1960b), and Hedberg (1967)>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Moist
areas, or hummocks <most commonly occurring on recently disturbed silt or clay
deposits, such as thaw flow slides, eroding banks, fine grained floodplains,
wet clay or silt, by river banks or lake shores, on damp but loose and blowing
moist, calcareous gravel, in small marshy depressions among polygons, on sand
and occasionally in dry tundra, or in mudboil centres. Deschampsia cespitosa
subsp. brevifolia also occurs around construction sites and settlements.>.
(380) Circumpolar, in Canada found on the northern and western arctic islands.
(381) This taxon is indicative of a location that has been recently disturbed,
either by the influence of humans or because of natural disturbances
characteristic of flood plains, slumping slopes, or frost boils. (384)
Specimens integrading between typical subsp. cespitosa and extreme subsp.
brevifolia sometimes occur at the same site, so that the recognition of the
taxon as a subspecies as suggested by Tzvelev (1974) appears more appropriate
than the full species status given in Porsild (1964). Most collections from
the Queen Elizabeth Islands are assignable to subsp. brevifolia, but at warmer
sites, such as near Lake Hazen, Ellesmere Island, specimens are larger, more
diffuse, and look more like subsp. cespitosa. The phenotypic plasticity in
this taxon was observed in plants transplanted from Eureka Sound, Ellesmere
Island (80°09'N, 86°00'W) in 1990, to Iqaluit, Baffin Island (64°44'N,
68°28'W) and Ottawa, Ontario (45°18'N, 75°50'W). Over a three year period the
plants grown in Iqaluit became smaller and more stunted. Many of the 10 plants
grown in Ottawa died, but the one illustrated in the image library became
larger and with more diffuse inflorescences as photographed in 1994. In the
photograph the previous season’s inflorescence as seen in the straw has
tightly appressed branches, the 1994 inflorescences have spreading branches.
The voucher for the original collection is of a plant approximately 16 cm
high, the voucher for the photograph in the image library is a plant 32-33 cm
high. The very short awn is sometimes absent or broken and often overlooked,
resulting in small specimens being misidentified as Poa. This subspecies is
distinguished from subsp. glauca by the very dense, often spicate, oblongate
inflorescence with short branches; the leaf blade not very hard, usually
green, and flat or loosely involute (Tzvelev 1976). (385) D. brevifolia R. Br.
Specimens intergrading between typical subsp. cespitosa and extreme subsp.
brevifolia occur, sometimes at the same site, so that the recognition of the
taxon as a subspecies as suggested by Tzvelev (1974) appears more appropriate
than the full species status given in Porsild (1964). (431) Code used for
graphics files: podebr.


Deschampsia paramushirensis <Honda>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) J. Fac. Sci. Tokyo (Bot.) 3: 140. 1930.
(5) Deschampsia cespitosa subsp. paramushirensis (Honda) Tzvelev, Zlaki SSSR:
283. 1976. (6) Type: Japan: Kamogawa, ins. Paramushir, Y. Kudo 5272, 1920.
(Holotype: TNS). (7) D. pumila (Griseb.) Ostenf. in Meddel. Grønland 64: 169.
1923, non (Stevn ex Westb.) Fomin and Woronow, 1907. (10) Plants less than 15
cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 10-27 cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted, or matted <forming mossy turf tussocks
5-20 cm in diameter, with basal leaves less than 5 cm high>. (29) Prophylls
10-20 mm long. (30) Prophylls with scabrous veins. (31) Prophylls lacking
pronounced keels. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming
exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted
into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part.
(73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 1.2-3.5 mm long.
(77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules lanceolate. (80)
Ligules apices acuminate, or acute. (81) Ligules entire. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 1-5
cm long. (90) Leaves 0.8-1.3 mm wide <when rolled>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in
bud <but the very pronounced ribs may cause them to appear as folded>. (93)
Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf
blades adaxially scabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to
other veins in the leaf. (121) Leaf blades bulliform cells in distinct rows on
either side of the midvein. (126) Leaf blades folded. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence <pyramidal>. (155) Inflorescence diffuse.
(160) Inflorescence 4.5-6 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 15-60 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with
spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 18-60 mm
long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (186) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188)
Spikelets oblong. (189) Spikelets 3.9-4.8 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.1-2.3 mm
wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 2, or 3. (212) First glume 0.8-0.9 × the
length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.7-0.85 × spikelet length.
(214) First glume 2.7-4 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First
glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1. (219) First glume apex acuminate,
or acute. (220) Second glume as long, or longer than the spikelet. (221)
Second glume almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222)
Second glume 3.4-4.5 mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224) Second
glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 1-1.5 mm
long. (228) Rachilla internode hairy. (229) Rachilla pronounced between the
florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus
differentiated. (233) Callus hairs 1.2-1.4 mm long. (234) Callus hairs shorter
than the floret. (235) Lemma 2.8-3.2 mm long. (236) Lemma oblong. (237) Lemma
rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface shiny. (240) Lemma glabrous. (242)
Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex rounded, or truncate. (244) Lemma apex erose.
(245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awned. (247) Awn arising from
the middle or below. (248) Awn 1.6-2.5 mm long. (249) Palea well-developed.
(250) Palea 2.5-2.9 mm long. (251) Palea with glabrous veins. (285) Anthers
1.5-1.8 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325)
Fruit a caryopsis. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 26, 28, 36, and 39 <2n
= 26, 28, 36, Jorgensen et al. (1958), 2n = 28, Hagerup (1939), 2n = 39,
Böcher and Larsen (1950), 2n = ca. 39, Bowden (1960b) for a collection from
the sand below the high tide mark at Iqaluit>. (373) Substrate type:
halophytic. (374) Moist areas <forming dense tussocks on damp mud, sand, or
gravel by brackish pools or on marshy flats near the tidal high water line. A
few plants have been struggling to survive behind the Science Institute of the
Northwest Territories building in Iqaluit.>. (380) This species is reported in
eastern North America from Greenland and northern Quebec to Ellesmere Island,
Alaska, and Siberia. (381) Mats of this plant are dense and compete well with
plants of similar size on damp and somewhat disturbed sites. They are readily
outcompeted by Arctagrostis latifolia in similarly damp but more stable
habitats. (384) This taxon has generally been known in Canada as D. pumila
(Griseb.) Ostenf. (Porsild 1957, Bowden 1960b, Hultén 1968). Tzvelev (1976)
recognized that D. pumila is a later homonym of D. pumila Stevn. ex Fomin and
Waronow) referable to Catabrosa. He recognized the taxon at the subspecific
level of D. cespitosa subsp. paramushirensis and distinguished it from D.
cespitosa subsp. borealis. Hultén (1968) placed the name D. borealis (Trautv.)
Roshev. into synonymy under D. pumila. A comparison on information in the
literature encourages the idea that these names all apply to the same entity.
A comparison of characters from Canadian and Eurasian specimens in the genus
Deschampsia is given in McLachlan et al. (1989), Table 2. (385) D. pumila
(Trin.) Ostenf. The name D. pumila is a later homonym of D. pumila (Stevn ex.
Fomin and Woronow) referable to Catabrosa (Tzvelev 1976). (431) Code used for
graphics files: podepa.


Dupontia fisheri <R. Br.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Chlor. Melvill. 33: 1823. (6) Type:
Canada. N.W.T.: Melville Island, 1820, Mr. (G.) Fisheron Parry’s first voyage.
(Holotype: BM! Isotype: LE, Tzvelev, 1976). (7) Dupontia psilosantha Rupr.,
Fl. Samojed. Cisural. (Beitr. Pflanzenk. Russ. Reiches 2) pl. 6. 1845.
Dupontia fisheri f. psilosantha (Rupr.) Polunin, Bull. Natl. Mus. Canada 94
(Biol. Ser. 24): 79. 1940. Dupontia fisheri subsp. psilosantha (Rupr.) Hultén,
Acta Univ. Lund. Ser. 2, 38: 226. 1942. TYPE: USSR: described from Kolgujev,
“In litt. austr. ins. Kolgujev,” Ruprecht. (Holotype: LE, Tzvelev 1976).
Dupontia fisheri var. aristata Malte in Polunin, Bull. Natl. Mus. Canada 94
(Biol. Ser. 24): 80. 1940. Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Baffin Island, Albert
Harbour, Eclipse Sound, 14 Aug. 1927. M. O. Malte 118831. (Holotype: CAN!).
(10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 6-50 cm
high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (21) Plants with conspicuously long
horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous, or
stoloniferous <horizontal stems sometimes above ground, especially in tidal
zones>. (23) Rhizomes elongate. (24) Rhizomes 1-3 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales
smooth. (26) Rhizome scales 3-23 mm long <often poorly preserved>. (27)
Rhizome scales glabrous. (32) Stems erect <usually only a single culm per
season in the High Arctic>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36)
Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming exposed. (38) Culm
nodes number visible 0-1. (39) Culm nodes rooting at the lower nodes <but not
as conspicuous as in plants of Arctophila fulva>. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the
lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous <veins conspicuous>. (75) Ligules present.
(76) Ligules 0.4-2(-5.5) mm long <0.4-1.2 mm on basal leaves, to 5.5 mm on
uppermost culm leaves>. (77) Ligules membranous, or a fringed membrane. (78)
Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices
truncate. (81) Ligules erose, or lacerate. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems <but more towards the base of the culm>. (84)
Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 1-13 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-2 mm wide <folded
width>. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf
blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf
blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein conspicuously larger
than the lateral veins <usually>. (121) Leaf blades bulliform cells in
distinct rows on either side of the midvein. (126) Leaf blades folded, or
involute <leaf margins only slightly rolled inwards>. (144) Flag leaf sheaths
not inflated <somewhat inflated in larger specimens>. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate <not always fully exserted>. (154) Inflorescence lanceolate <to
pyramidal>. (155) Inflorescence diffuse <at anthesis in larger specimens. In
smaller High Arctic plants, inflorescences may appear dense and spike-like>.
(160) Inflorescence 2-19 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 10-60 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at
lowest node 2-3. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary
branches, or with spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary
branches 3-50(-80) mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187)
Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets obovate. (189) Spikelets
4.7-8.4 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.4-4.2 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet
1-3(-5). (212) First glume 0.8-0.95 × the length of the second glume. (213)
First glume 0.65-0.8 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 3.2-6.5 mm long.
(215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume
veins 1-3. (218) First glume margins glabrous <glumes and lemma with wide
hyaline margins>. (219) First glume apex acuminate, or obtuse, or truncate.
(220) Second glume as long, or longer than the spikelet. (221) Second glume
almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume
3.4-8.2 mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224) Second glume glabrous.
(225) Second glume veins 1-3. (226) Rachilla internode 1-1.5 mm long. (228)
Rachilla internode glabrous <sometimes with a few scabrous trichomes>. (229)
Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla terminating in a
vestigial floret <sometimes>, or extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231)
Callus differentiated. (233) Callus hairs 1 mm long <approx.>. (234) Callus
hairs shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 3.2-6 mm long. (236) Lemma
lanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled <slightly>. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240)
Lemma glabrous, or hairy. (242) Lemma veins 3-5. (243) Lemma apex acuminate,
or acute. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma
apex awnless, or awned. (247) Awn arising from the tip <if awn is present>.
(248) Awn 0-2 mm long. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 2.8-5.7 mm
long. (251) Palea with glabrous veins. (285) Anthers 0.7-3 mm long. (296)
Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327)
Fruit 3-4 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 42, 44, and 88 <Löve
and Löve 1975>. (374) Wet meadows, or moist areas <a common member of low
wetland communities and particularly abundant near lagoons. It is sometimes
dominant or co-dominant with Alopecurus alpinus.>. (381) Indicative of wet or
at least damp, water retaining environments. This taxon varies in height with
degree growing days and nutrient levels in the microhabitat. When plants form
small inflorescences in otherwise favourable microhabitats this may be
indicative of re-growth after grazing by water fowl during the spring. (384)
Porsild (1964) recognized this taxon and also D. fisheri subsp. psilosantha
(Rupr.) Hultén, which we place in synonymy with D. fisheri. While extreme
morphological expressions occur, there appears to be a continuum of variation
among Canadian specimens.The characters used to separate subspecies in Europe
and Russia e.g. shape of glumes, number of florets per spikelet, lemma
hairiness, and anther length, do not align consistently among North American
samples. Tzvelev (1976) reported that “The affinity of the genera Arctophila
and Dupontia, is confirmed by the existence of the sterile hybrid
×Arctodupontia scleroclada (Rupr.) Tzvelev, (1973), Novosti Sist. Vyssh. Rast.
10: 91.”. = Poa scleroclada Rupr. described from the Malaya Zemlya tundra, but
recently also found on the Chukotsk Peninsula. On the basis of spikelet
structure, it occupies an intermediate position between the parental genera.
It has not been reported from North America, but there are places, where the
two genera occur together, and where the possibility of hybrid plants should
be investigated for example, on the Tuktoyaktuk Peninsula and Richards Island
at the mouth of the Mackenzie River. Dupontia fisheri also forms an
intergeneric hybrid with Poa labradorica (Darbyshire et al. 1992). (385)
Porsild (1964) recognized this taxon and also D. fisheri subsp. psilosantha
(Rupr.) Hultén, which we place in synonymy with D. fisheri. While extreme
morphological expressions occur, there appears to be a continuum of variation
among Canadian specimens. Dupontia forms intergeneric hybrids with Arctophila
(Tzvelev 1976) and Poa labradorica (Darbyshire et al. 1992). (431) Code used
for graphics files: podufi.


Elymus alaskanus <(Scribn. and Merr.) A. Löve>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Taxon 19: 299. 1970. (5) Agropyron
alaskanum Scribn. and Merr. Contrib. U.S. Natl. Herb. 13: 85. 1910. Agropyron
boreale (Turcz.) Drobow subsp. alaskanum (Scribn. and Merr.) Melderis, Ark.
Bot. Ser. 2. 7: 19. 1968. (6) Type: United States: Alaska. Circle City. 18
Aug. 1899. W.H. Osgood. (Holotype: US). (7) Triticum boreale Turcz. Fl.
Baical. Dahur. 2(2): 345. 1856, non Elymus borealis Scribn. 1900. Agropyron
boreale (Turcz.) Drobow, Tr. Bot. Muz. Imp. Akad. Nauk, 16: 84. 1916.
Roegeneria borealis (Turcz.) Nevski in Komarov, Fl. URSS 2: 264. 1934. Elymus
alaskanus subsp. borealis (Turcz.) A. Löve and D. Löve, Bot. Not. 128: 502.
Type: USSR: “ad viam Ochotensem prope fl. Aldan” Yakutsk ASSR: Yakutsk to
Okhotsk road near Aldan River (“T. biflorum”) 1834-1836. (Holotype: LE?).
Agropyron violaceum var. latiglume Scribn. and J.G. Sm., U. S. Dept. Agric.
Div. Agrost. Bull. 4: 30. 1897. Agropyron latiglume (Scribn. and J.G. Sm.)
Rydb. Bull. Torrey Bot. Club 36: 539. 1909, non Elymus latiglumis R.A. Phil.
1864. Roegneria latiglumis (Scribn. and J.G. Sm.) Beetle, Rhodora 54: 196.
1952. Elymus alaskanus subsp. latiglumis (Scribn. and J.G. Sm.) A. Löve, Taxon
29: 166. 1984. Type: United States: Montana. Gallatin Co., Lone Mountain,
Tweedy 1011. (Lectotype: US, cf. Hitchcock and Chase 1951, p. 798). Agropyron
violaceum var. hyperarcticum Polunin, Bull. Natl. Mus. Canada 92 (Biol. Ser.
24): 95. 1940. Roegneria borealis subsp. hyperarctica (Polunin) A. Löve and D.
Löve, Acta Horti Gothob. 20: 188. 1956. Agropyron boreale Drobow subsp.
hyperarcticum (Polunin) Melderis in Hultén, Ark. Bot. Ser. 2, 7: 19. 1968.
Type: Canada: N.W.T. Baffin Is., Arctic Bay, 9 Sept. 1936. N. Polunin 2531.
(Holotype: BM, Isotypes: CAN! GH). Agropyron violaceum subsp. violaceum sensu
Hultén, Fl. Alaska and Neighbouring Territories 185. 1968. non (Hornem.)
Lange. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
(15-)20-40(-70) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted
<loosely>. (29) Prophylls 6-18 mm long. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins
<glabrescent>. (31) Prophylls lacking pronounced keels <bladeless sheath-like
structures with several veins occur>. (32) Stems erect, or decumbent. (35)
Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes
not exposed <usually>, or becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible
0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the
margins fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules
present. (76) Ligules 0.2-0.6 mm long. (77) Ligules a fringed membrane. (78)
Ligules hairy. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices truncate.
(81) Ligules erose. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed along the
stems <appearing as basal in dwarf plants>. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves
4-16 cm long. (90) Leaves 3-6 mm wide. (91) Leaf blades without auricles
<collar margins sometimes swollen and overlapping>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in
bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical.
(107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or hairy. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface hairy. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein
similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat <usually,
sometimes drying involute>. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (154) Inflorescence
linear. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 3.5-10.5 cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 5-20 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis scabrous <especially
on the angles>. (185) Spikelets sessile. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above
the glumes. (188) Spikelets lanceolate, or ovate, or oblanceolate. (189)
Spikelets 11-17 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.8-6(-9.2) mm wide. (191) Florets
per spikelet (2-)3-5(-7). (212) First glume 0.8-1 × the length of the second
glume. (213) First glume 0.4-0.55 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 5-9 mm
long. (215) First glume lanceolate <wider and asymmetrical near the apex,
usually abruptly narrowed to a point or short awn>. (216) First glume
glabrous, or with trichomes. (217) First glume veins 3(-5). (218) First glume
margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acuminate. (220) Second glume 0.4-0.9
× as long as the spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long as, or longer
than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 5-12 mm long. (223) Second glume
lanceolate. (224) Second glume glabrous, or with trichomes <rarely hairy>.
(225) Second glume veins 3-6. (226) Rachilla internode 16-22 mm long. (228)
Rachilla internode scabrous. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the
florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus
not differentiated. (235) Lemma 7-10 mm long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237)
Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma glabrous, or
hairy. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex acuminate. (244) Lemma apex
entire. (245) Lemma apex ciliate, or not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awned.
(247) Awn arising from the tip. (248) Awn 1-2(-3) mm long. (249) Palea
well-developed. (250) Palea 7-9 mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous veins.
(285) Anthers 1.2-2 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317)
Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 4.5-5.5 mm long. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28 <as Elymus alaskanus, Hedberg (1967), and Knaben
(1968); as Agropyron violaceum, Böcher and Larsen (1950), Jörgensen et al.
(1958)>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Sand <found predominantly on
well-drained, weakly to moderately alkaline, sandy and gravelly soils. Common
on wind or water eroded banks and knolls, particularly on disturbed soils
around animal burrows. It is abundant around settlements and construction
sites in the warmest sectors of the High Arctic.>. (381) The occurence of
plants of this species indicates dry well drained, weakly to moderately
alkaline environments. (384) A circumpolar, polymorphic species. Within this
species several subspecies have been distinguished on the basis of the
following: leaf width, blade surfaces glabrous or pubescent, inflorescence
length, glume length and width, and the presence or absence of glume and lemma
hairs. It is here treated as an aggregate and the description includes the
extremes of variation found in North American material. More synonymy for this
complex including specimens from outside our area is suggested by Löve (1984),
and many other names have been applied to morphological extremes of the
complex by Russian authors as indicated by Tzvelev (1976). Elymus alaskanus is
the name used by A. Melderis (1980) in Flora Europaea, and Kartesz (1994).
(385) Agropyron latiglume(Scribn. and J.G. Sm.) Rydb. Like many taxa in the
Triticeae, this taxon has had many names (see synonymy in data bank). Elymus
alaskanus is the name used by Melderis (1980) in Flora Europaea, and Kartesz
(1994). (431) Code used for graphics files: poelal.


Festuca <L.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more
than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 2.5-25.6-120 cm high. (14) Plants perennial
herbs. (15) Plants tufted, or forming loose clusters. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems, or
without easily seen horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes
elongate, or compacted. (24) Rhizomes 0.5-1-2 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales
smooth, or striate. (26) Rhizome scales 10-16-25 mm long. (27) Rhizome scales
glabrous, or hairy. (29) Prophylls 5-10-20 mm long. (30) Prophylls with smooth
veins, or with hairy veins. (31) Prophylls with pronounced keels, or lacking
pronounced keels. (32) Stems erect, or decumbent. (35) Stems circular or oval
in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy. (37) Culm nodes not
exposed, or becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-2. (39) Culm
nodes not rooting at the lower nodes. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into
the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused to the apex, or with the
margins fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous, or with
trichomes. (74) Sheaths pubescent, or hirsute. (75) Ligules present. (76)
Ligules 0.1-0.3-0.6 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous, or a fringed membrane.
(78) Ligules hairy. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices
acute, or truncate. (81) Ligules entire, or erose, or cleft. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (85) Leaves not
distinctly distichous. (89) Leaves 1-8-20 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.3-0.8-2 mm
wide. (91) Leaf blades with sheath auricles, or with blade auricles, or
without auricles. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical, or
divaricate, or reflexed. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or scabrous, or
hairy. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous, or scabrous, or hairy.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size
to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades folded, or involute. (144) Flag
leaf sheaths inflated, or not inflated. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154)
Inflorescence linear, or lanceolate, or ovate. (155) Inflorescence dense, or
diffuse. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-4-20 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 4-12-40 mm
wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous, or scabrous, or hairy. (164)
Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 0, or 1, or 2. (165)
Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches, or with
spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 0.2-5-17 mm
long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth, or scabrous. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187)
Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate. (189) Spikelets
3-7-15 mm long. (190) Spikelets 0.3-2.2-5 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet
2-6. (212) First glume 0.58-1.215-4.6 × the length of the second glume. (213)
First glume 0.25-0.3971-0.53 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 1-2.85-4 mm
long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous, or with
trichomes. (217) First glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins glabrous, or
ciliate. (219) First glume apex acuminate, or acute. (220) Second glume 0.4 ×
as long as the spikelet or less, or 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221)
Second glume shorter than the lowest floret, or almost as long as, or longer
than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 2.2-3.8-6 mm long. (223) Second
glume lanceolate, or ovate. (224) Second glume glabrous, or with trichomes.
(225) Second glume veins 1-2, or 3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.1-0.9-1.2 mm
long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous, or scabrous, or hairy. (229) Rachilla
not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla terminating in a vestigial
floret, or extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus not
differentiated. (235) Lemma 2.9-4.6-6.2 mm long. (236) Lemma ovate, or
lanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled, or rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface
dull. (240) Lemma sparsely scaberulous, or hairy. (241) Lemma with trichomes
on veins only, or on intervein region and veins. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243)
Lemma apex acuminate, or acute. (244) Lemma apex entire, or erose, or bifid.
(245) Lemma apex ciliate, or not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless, or awned.
(247) Awn arising from the tip, or from below the apex but above the middle.
(248) Awn 0.1-1.4-3.3 mm long. (249) Palea well-developed <except F.
viviparoidea>. (250) Palea 3-4.5-6 mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous veins,
or with hairy veins. (285) Anthers 0.3-1.5-3.5 mm long. (296) Ovary superior.
(309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1.8-2.4-4
mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28, or 42, or 44, or 49, or 56,
or 62. (373) Substrate type: halophytic <usually>. (384) Restricted generic
description combining data for the taxa occurring in the Canadian Arctic
Archipelago, using INTKEY. (385) Restricted generic description combining data
for the taxa occurring in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, using INTKEY. (425)
Genus. (431) Code used for graphics files: pofe.


Festuca baffinensis <Polunin>

      (1) Baffin fescue. (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Bull. Natl. Mus.
Canada 92 (Biol. Ser. 24): 91. 1940. (6) Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Baffin Island,
Pond Inlet, 12 Sept. 1934, N. Polunin 706 (Lectotype BM! Designated by L.E.
Pavlick, 1984, holotype from GH missing, cotype from CAN missing. Paratype and
Topotype: GH! CAN! Polunin 705). (7) F. brevifolia var. arctica Saint-Yves
subvar. pubiculmis Saint-Yves, Candollea 2: 254. 1925. Festuca brachyphylla
var. arctica subvar. pubiculmis (St. Yves) Litard, Candollea 10: 108. 1945.
(10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
5-20(-27) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <more or
less uniform tufts, without conspicuous dead sheaths>. (29) Prophylls 5-15 mm
long. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins. (31) Prophylls lacking pronounced
keels. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36)
Stems densely hairy <densely tomentose with short recurved hairs>. (37) Culm
nodes not exposed <usually>. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades.
(72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part <approximately half
the length of the sheath, Frederiksen, 1982>. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75)
Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.1-0.3 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78)
Ligules hairy. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices truncate.
(81) Ligules entire, or cleft. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly
basal <deep bluish-green>. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves
(15-)30-100(-170) cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-1.2 mm wide <when folded>. (91)
Leaf blades without auricles. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud <margins often
slightly inrolled>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the
stem. (107) Leaf blades adaxially hairy. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface
glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein
similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades folded
<loosely>. (144) Flag leaf sheaths inflated <somewhat, flag leaf blades
0.5-3.7 cm long, 0.7-1.9 mm wide>. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154)
Inflorescence lanceolate to ovate <ovoid, to elongate in taller plants, very
dense in shorter plants>. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence
1.5-3(-4) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-15 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main
axis hairy. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 1, or 2
<usually>. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary
branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 3-15 mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches scabrous. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186)
Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally
compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate. (189) Spikelets 4.5-8.5 mm long. (190)
Spikelets 1.5-2.5 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 2-5(-6). (212) First
glume 0.65-0.8 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.46-0.53 ×
spikelet length. (214) First glume 2.2-3.7 mm long <0.3-0.7 mm wide>. (215)
First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1.
(218) First glume margins ciliate. (219) First glume apex acuminate. (220)
Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221) Second glume shorter
than the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 3-5 mm long <0.6-1.2 mm wide>.
(223) Second glume lanceolate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume
veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.8-1.2 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode
glabrous. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla
extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235)
Lemma 3.5-5.6 mm long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma rounded on the
back. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma sparsely scaberulous. (241) Lemma
with trichomes on intervein region and veins <near top>. (242) Lemma veins 5.
(243) Lemma apex acuminate. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex not
ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awned. (247) Awn arising from the tip. (248) Awn
0.8-2.5(-3.3) mm long. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 3.5-6 mm long.
(251) Palea with scabrous veins. (285) Anthers (0.3-)0.5-1.1 mm long. (296)
Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327)
Fruit 2-2.5 mm long <ovary apex with a few sparse hairs>. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28. (373) Substrate type: nitrophilous. (374) Moist
areas, or clay <occurring on moist disturbed soils or in frost cracks, on
floodplains, most commonly on weakly to moderately alkaline silty sand and
gravel.>. (380) A circumpolar arctic and alpine taxon. (381) Commonly
indicative of an organic, moist, or nitrophillous environment. This species is
often found associated with former Thule houses. It flourished near the base
of an observation tower at the biological station, Polar Bear Pass, Bathurst
Island. (384) While McNeill and Dore (1976) suggested that F. baffinensis may
be a subspecies of F. brachyphylla, species status was supported in isozyme
studies (Aiken et al. 1993, 1995). (385) While McNeill and Dore (1976)
suggested that F. baffinensis may be a subspecies of F. brachyphylla, species
status was supported in isozyme studies (Aiken et al. 1993, 1995). (431) Code
used for graphics files: pofeba.


Festuca brachyphylla <Schult. and Schult. f.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Mantissa 2: 646. 1827. (5) Festuca
brevifolia R. Br., Chlor. Melvill. 31. 1823, non Muhl. 1817. Festuca ovina
var. brachyphylla (Schult.) Piper, Contrib. U.S. Natl. Herb. 10: 27. 1906. (6)
Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Melville Island, Mr. (J.) Edwards on W.E. Parry
Expedition 1819-1820 (Lectotype: BM!, selected by Frederiksen 1982). (7)
Festuca brachyphylla f. flavida Polunin, Bull. Natl. Mus. Canada 94 (Biol.
Ser. 24): 90. 1940. Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Baffin Island, Lake Harbour, 25-26
Aug. 1927,M.O. Malte s.n., (Holotype: CAN!, Isotype: GH!). (10) Plants less
than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 5-35(-55) cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <but sometimes becoming loosely
caespitose when growing in moss. Often appearing grayish from the accumulation
of dead sheaths>. (29) Prophylls 8-15 mm long. (30) Prophylls with smooth
veins <glabrescent>. (31) Prophylls lacking pronounced keels <but the veins
are prominent>. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous, or scabrous <sometimes, sparsely near the apex>.
(37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes number
visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths
with the margins fused only in the lower part <at least half their length when
young, decaying into fibers>. (73) Sheaths glabrous, or with trichomes. (74)
Sheaths scabrous <minutely scaberulous if so>. (75) Ligules present. (76)
Ligules 0.1-0.3 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules hairy. (80)
Ligules apices truncate. (81) Ligules entire, or cleft. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal <bluish-green, sometimes with a purple
tinge, to pale yellow-green (f. flavida Polunin>. (84) Leaves alternate. (89)
Leaves 2-10(-20) cm long. (90) Leaves 0.3-1 mm wide <when folded>. (91) Leaf
blades without auricles <sometimes with an erect swelling at auricle
position>. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf
blades spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially hairy <or
sparsely scaberulous>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous <with a few
sparse trichomes towards the apex>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120)
Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf
blades folded <tightly folded, with the longer leaves appearing very fine when
growing beside other arctic Festuca species>. (144) Flag leaf sheaths not
inflated <flag leaf blades varying 0.2 cm long (F. hyperborea-like) to 1.5 cm
long, sometimes on the same plant, 0.6-1.7 mm wide>. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate <often spike-like. Culms usually two to three times longer than the
basal leaves>. (154) Inflorescence linear. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160)
Inflorescence 1.5-4(-5) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-7(-10) mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis scabrous <scaberulous>. (164) Number of inflorescence
branches at lowest node 1 <usually>. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with
appressed secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 1-9 mm
long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches scabrous <scaberulous>. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187)
Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate. (189) Spikelets
4-8.5 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.5-3 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet
2-4(-6). (212) First glume 0.7-0.8 × the length of the second glume. (213)
First glume 0.4-0.5 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 1.2-3.3 mm long
<0.2-0.5 mm wide>. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous.
(217) First glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins ciliate. (219) First
glume apex acuminate. (220) Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet.
(221) Second glume shorter than the lowest floret. (222) Second glume
(2.4-)2.9-4.6 mm long <0.3-0.9 mm wide>. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224)
Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode
0.6-1 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode hairy. (229) Rachilla not pronounced
between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret.
(231) Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma 3-5.2 mm long. (236) Lemma
lanceolate. (237) Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240)
Lemma sparsely scaberulous. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex acuminate,
or acute. (244) Lemma apex erose. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma
apex awned. (247) Awn arising from the tip. (248) Awn 0.8-2.5 mm long. (249)
Palea well-developed. (250) Palea (3.1-)3.7-5.6 mm long. (251) Palea with
scabrous veins. (285) Anthers (0.5-)0.7-1(-1.3) mm long. (296) Ovary superior.
(309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 2 mm long
<glabrous>. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 42 and 44 <Löve and Löve
(1975) 14 counts. A count of 2n = 28 was published as applying to a specimen
of F. brachyphylla by Mosquin and Hayley (1966) M. and H. 6458, (Voucher at
DAO). but the specimen was re-examined by the first author in 1994 and
considered to be F. hyperborea.>. (373) Substrate type: acidic <slightly>.
(374) Moist areas <rarely>, or clay <very commonly on sand and dry gravel, in
river beds or along the banks. Rarely this species has been found in wet
meadows on Ellesmere Island, and specimens from such habitats often have small
trichomes on culms and leaves.>. (381) An early colonizer of dry, often sandy,
usually slightly acidic conditions. Reddish plants are indicative of added
nitrogen in the environment, either from the influence of humans or animals,
as observed around beaches, fox dens, or owl perches. (384) A phenotypically
plastic, hexaploid species, this is the most widespread Festuca in the Arctic
Islands. (Aiken et al. 1993, 1995). (385) A phenotypically plastic, hexaploid
species, and the most widespread Festuca in the Arctic Islands. (Aiken et al.
1993, 1995). (428) This name is used in Porsild (1964). (431) Code used for
graphics files: pofebr.


Festuca edlundiae <S. Aiken, Consaul and Lefkovitch>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Syst. Bot. 20(3). 381. 1995. (6) Type:
Canada. N.W.T.: Bathurst Island, Polar Bear Pass, 75°43'N, 98°12'W, marine
worked carbonate ridge, on the north side of a broad valley west of the
Goodsir River, 11 Aug. 1985, S.G. Aiken 3949. (Holotype: CAN 502531! Isotype:
DAO 460223!). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11)
Plants 2.5-10(-14) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted
<stems conspicuously branched below; dead sheaths without a lamina often
drying flat and pale yellow, often conspicous throughout the tuft of an older
plant>. (29) Prophylls 5 mm long. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins. (31)
Prophylls lacking pronounced keels. (32) Stems decumbent <previous season’s
flowering culms often forming a ring of straw around the plant>. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous <usually somewhat
prostrate>. (37) Culm nodes not exposed. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into
the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part. (73)
Sheaths glabrous <or appearing glabrous as small trichomes are appressed to
the surface when plants grow in polar desert conditions>. (75) Ligules
present. (76) Ligules 0.2-0.5 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules
hairy. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices truncate <higher
on sides than in the middle>. (81) Ligules entire, or cleft. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 1.5-9
cm long <in tufts 3-9 cm tall; growing to 10 cm long in the greenhouse>. (90)
Leaves 0.8-1.1 mm wide <when folded>. (91) Leaf blades with sheath auricles
<represented by distinct, erect swellings>. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud
<with margins incurved>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades spreading
from the vertical <to almost prostrate>. (107) Leaf blades adaxially hairy
<with a few hairs>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous, or scabrous
<glabrous or with minute, often appressed trichomes on the abaxial surface>.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size
to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades folded. (144) Flag leaf sheaths
inflated <sometimes somewhat inflated, blades often more than 1 cm long,
0.3-1.25 cm long, and often fully expanded before the inflorescence emerges
from the sheath>. (151) Inflorescence paniculate <sometimes reduced and
spike-like>. (154) Inflorescence linear. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160)
Inflorescence 1.5-3.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 8-15 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous, or scabrous <sparsely>. (164) Number of
inflorescence branches at lowest node 1, or 2. (165) Inflorescence primary
branches with appressed secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary
branches 0.4-0.7 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches scabrous. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187)
Spikelets laterally compressed <often deep purple>. (188) Spikelets
lanceolate. (189) Spikelets 4.5-8.5 mm long. (190) Spikelets 3-4 mm wide.
(191) Florets per spikelet 2-6. (212) First glume 0.58-0.89 × the length of
the second glume. (213) First glume 0.26-0.51 × spikelet length. (214) First
glume 1.8-3.5 mm long <0.2-0.6 mm wide>. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216)
First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins
glabrous. (219) First glume apex acuminate. (220) Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as
long as the spikelet. (221) Second glume shorter than the lowest floret. (222)
Second glume 2.9-4.3 mm long <0.4-0.9 mm wide>. (223) Second glume ovate.
(224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins (1-)3. (226) Rachilla
internode 1 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode hairy <sparsely>. (229) Rachilla
not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the
uppermost floret. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma 3.6-5.2 mm
long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma
surface dull. (240) Lemma sparsely scaberulous. (241) Lemma with trichomes on
intervein region and veins <upper portion only>. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243)
Lemma apex acuminate. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex ciliate. (246)
Lemma apex awned. (247) Awn arising from the tip. (248) Awn 1.1-2.9 mm long.
(249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 3.8-5.5 mm long. (251) Palea with
scabrous veins <towards the apex>. (285) Anthers 0.6-1.1 mm long. (296) Ovary
superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28 <type specimen counted by K.C. Armstrong,
Agriculture Canada, 1986>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Clay <found
on fine calcareous soils of polar deserts in the Queen Elizabeth Islands.>.
(381) The plants of this taxon are indicative of dry, alkaline environments.
(384) First discovered by B. May, Cornell Laboratory for Ecological and
Evolutionary Genetics, Ithaca, New York, in an isozyme study that was reported
on (Aiken et al. 1994). Bernie May is now at the University of California
Davis, Department of Animal Science. The species was named for Dr. S.A.
Edlund, Geological Survey of Canada (Aiken et al. 1995). (385) First
discovered by B. May, Cornell Laboratory for Ecological and Evolutionary
Genetics, Ithaca, New York, in an isozyme study (Aiken et al. 1994). Named for
Dr. S.A. Edlund, Geological Survey of Canada (Aiken et al. 1995). (428) First
discovered in an isozyme study by Bernie May, Cornell University (Aiken et al.
1994), named for Dr. S.A. Edlund, Geological Survey of Canada. (431) Code used
for graphics files: pofeed.


Festuca hyperborea <Holmen ex Frederiksen>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Bot. Not. 130: 273. 1977. (6) Type:
Greenland. Pearyland: Jorgan Bronlands Fjord, 28 July 1950, K. A. Holmen 8078.
(Holotype: C!, Isotype: DAO!). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than
15 cm high. (11) Plants 2.5-10(-13.5) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants tufted. (29) Prophylls 7-10 mm long. (30) Prophylls with smooth
veins <with a few scattered hairs>. (31) Prophylls lacking pronounced keels.
(32) Stems erect <loosely tufted. Commonly appearing as a clump made up of
numerous tufts which can be separated into distinct bundles of dead sheaths
accumulating under leaves of the actively growing plant; branching is often
apparent in the stems that are surrounded by dead sheaths. Dead sheaths are
pale gray or straw cream coloured>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed. (68) Sheaths
abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only
in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules
0.3-0.6 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules hairy. (79) Ligules
transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices truncate <and higher on sides than
middle>. (81) Ligules entire, or cleft. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves
mostly basal <green, often purple, pinkish tinged, often recurved>. (84)
Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 10-60 cm long <80 mm long when plants are grown
in the greenhouse>. (90) Leaves 0.4-0.7 mm wide <when folded>. (91) Leaf
blades with sheath auricles, or without auricles. (92) Leaf blades folded in
bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades reflexed <basal leaves
recurved>. (107) Leaf blades adaxially scabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glabrous <appearing so, but with appressed hairs, see Aiken et al.
1994>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar
in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades folded. (144) Flag leaf
sheaths inflated <slightly sometimes to 1.2 mm wide, blade characteristically
less than 0-8 mm long and spoon-shaped; usually tiny as the inflorescence is
emerging>. (151) Inflorescence paniculate <often small and spike-like>. (154)
Inflorescence linear. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 1.1-2.2
cm long. (161) Inflorescence 4-10 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis
scabrous <sparse>. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 1-2.
(165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches. (166)
Inflorescence primary branches 1-4 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary
branches smooth <to scaberulous>. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188)
Spikelets lanceolate. (189) Spikelets 3-6.5 mm long. (190) Spikelets 2-5 mm
wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 3-5(-6). (212) First glume 0.75-0.9 × the
length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.3-0.4 × spikelet length. (214)
First glume 1-3.5 mm long <0.2-0.6 mm wide, conspicuously narrower than upper
glume>. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First
glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins ciliate. (219) First glume apex
acuminate. (220) Second glume 0.4 × as long as the spikelet or less. (221)
Second glume shorter than the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 2.2-3.2 mm
long <0.5-0.9 mm wide>. (223) Second glume lanceolate <characteristically
broader in the centre>. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins
3. (226) Rachilla internode 1 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode hairy
<sparsely>. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla
extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235)
Lemma 2.9-4 mm long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma rounded on the back.
(239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma sparsely scaberulous. (241) Lemma with
trichomes on intervein region and veins. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex
acuminate. (244) Lemma apex bifid <very slightly>. (246) Lemma apex awned.
(247) Awn arising from below the apex but above the middle <described as
subterminal, but close to terminal, slightly curved or geniculate>. (248) Awn
0.7-3 mm long. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 3-3.5 mm long. (251)
Palea with scabrous veins <towards the apex>. (285) Anthers 0.4-1.1 mm long.
(296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis.
(327) Fruit 2.3-3 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28 <Holmen
1952>. (374) Moist areas <but preferring slightly wetter sites than F.
edlundiae. Abundant at the Thule site at Resolute Bay, Cornwallis Island, and
frequent in suitable habitats in the High Arctic. It does not appear to
tolerate conditions as alkaline as do plants of F. edlundiae.>. (381)
Sometimes indicative of mildly nitrophillous factors in an environment. (384)
See Frederiksen (1977, 1982), Aiken et al. (1994, 1995). Mentioned in Porsild
(1964), but not mapped although believed to occur on the northern islands of
the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. Festuca hyperborea was distinguished by
Holmen (1952), but the name was not validly published until a study by
Frederiksen (1977). Discussed in Aiken et al. (1994, 1995). (385) Mentioned in
Porsild (1964), but not mapped although believed to occur on the northern
islands of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. Festuca hyperborea was
distinguished by Holmen (1952), but the name was not validly published until a
study by Frederiksen (1977). Discussed in Aiken et al. (1994, 1995). (431)
Code used for graphics files: pofehy.


Festuca rubra subsp. rubra <s.l. L.>

      (1) Red fescue. (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Sp. Pl. 74. 1753. (5) For
extensive lists of synonymy see Hultén (1942), Hitchcock and Chase (1950),
Tzvelev (1976), Alexeev (1985), Pavlick (1985). (6) Type: Europe: sterilibus
siccis. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
15-90(-120) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants forming loose
clusters, or tufted <when plants are constrained by habitat factors>. (21)
Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal
stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes elongate, or compacted. (24)
Rhizomes 0.5-1.5 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales striate <finely so>. (26)
Rhizome scales 10-20 mm long. (27) Rhizome scales hairy <retrorsely so>. (32)
Stems erect, or decumbent. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36)
Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes number
visible 0-2. (39) Culm nodes not rooting at the lower nodes. (68) Sheaths
abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused to
the apex. (73) Sheaths with trichomes. (74) Sheaths pubescent <fine retrorse
hairs>. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.1-0.5 mm long. (77) Ligules
membranous. (78) Ligules hairy. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules
apices truncate. (81) Ligules entire, or cleft. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83)
Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 3-20 cm long <in
Arctic plants>. (90) Leaves 0.65-2 mm wide <folded>. (91) Leaf blades with
sheath auricles <represented by distinct, erect swellings>. (92) Leaf blades
folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem
<usually>, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially hairy.
(112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the
leaf. (126) Leaf blades involute. (144) Flag leaf sheaths not inflated. (151)
Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence linear <appressed after anthesis
or spreading>. (155) Inflorescence dense, or diffuse. (160) Inflorescence
2-10(-20) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 10-40 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main
axis scabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 1-2.
(165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches, or
with spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 2-6 mm
long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches scabrous. (185) Spikelets
pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets
laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate. (189) Spikelets 6-11 mm
long. (190) Spikelets 1.5-3 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 3-6. (211)
Glumes unequal. (212) First glume 3.5-4.6 × the length of the second glume.
(213) First glume 0.25-0.5 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 3-4 mm long.
(215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume with trichomes <at apex only>.
(217) First glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins ciliate. (219) First
glume apex acute. (220) Second glume <0.3-0.55× as long as the spikelet>.
(221) Second glume shorter than the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 3.5-4.6
mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225)
Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.8-1.2 mm long. (228) Rachilla
internode scabrous <hairs antrorse>. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the
florets. (230) Rachilla terminating in a vestigial floret. (231) Callus not
differentiated. (235) Lemma 5-6 mm long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma
rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface dull <often with longitudinal bands
of purple coloration; a contrast to the more horizontal bands in other genera
e.g. Poa>. (240) Lemma sparsely scaberulous <at apex>. (241) Lemma with
trichomes on intervein region and veins. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex
acuminate. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma
apex awned. (247) Awn arising from the tip. (248) Awn 0.5-1.5 mm long. (249)
Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 4.5-6 mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous
veins <minute trichomes>. (285) Anthers 2.5-3.5 mm long. (296) Ovary superior.
(309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 2-4 mm
long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 42, or 56. (374) Sand <The long
rhizomes of this species have excellent potential for stabilizing disturbed
ground and roadsides around towns. It would not be expected to compete with
established, undisturbed Low Arctic tundra.>. (380) A commercially available
turf species. The cultivar Boreal developed at the Agriculture Station,
Beaverlodge, has been planted in Iqaluit and Igloolik. Red fescue is believed
to have been planted at Lake Harbour. (381) Introduced in several communities
as a potential lawn grass, and to stabilize steep roadsides. This species
grows successfully in Iqaluit and at present appears to be the species of
choice in the Low Arctic when attempts are made to landscape around buildings
away from the immediate influence of salt water. In front of Arctic College,
Iqaluit it was apparently more successful than Poa pratensis 2-3 years after
both species had been seeded there (observation 1994). (384) An important,
commercially available turf grass. (385) Introduced in several communities as
a potential lawn grass, and to stabilize steep roadsides. (431) Code used for
graphics files: poferu.


Festuca rubra subsp. richardsonii <Hook.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Fl. Bor. Amer. 2: 250. 1840. (6) Type:
“Arctic Coast, 1826, new”. (Syntype: GH!). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high,
or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 10-50 cm high. (14) Plants perennial
herbs. (15) Plants tufted, or forming loose clusters. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems, or
without easily seen horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes
elongate, or compacted. (24) Rhizomes 0.5-2 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales
smooth. (26) Rhizome scales 10-25 mm long. (27) Rhizome scales glabrous. (32)
Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems
glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes
number visible 0-2. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72)
Sheaths with the margins fused to the apex. (73) Sheaths glabrous, or with
trichomes. (74) Sheaths hirsute <hairs retrorsely so when present>. (75)
Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.2-0.4 mm long. (77) Ligules a fringed
membrane. (78) Ligules hairy. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules
apices truncate. (81) Ligules entire, or cleft. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83)
Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 40-170 cm long. (90)
Leaves 0.4-1.5 mm wide <folded width>. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud. (93)
Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from
the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially hairy. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades
involute. (151) Inflorescence paniculate <sometimes spike-like>. (154)
Inflorescence linear. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence
(2-)3-5(-7) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 10-12 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence
main axis hairy. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 1-3.
(165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches. (166)
Inflorescence primary branches 7-17 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary
branches scabrous <or pubescent>. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188)
Spikelets lanceolate to oblanceolate. (189) Spikelets 6.6-8.7(-10.3) mm long.
(190) Spikelets 1.5-3 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 3-5. (212) First
glume 0.65-0.7 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.3-0.4 ×
spikelet length. (214) First glume 2-3.7 mm long. (215) First glume
lanceolate. (216) First glume with trichomes <hairy>. (217) First glume veins
1. (218) First glume margins ciliate. (219) First glume apex acuminate. (220)
Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221) Second glume shorter
than the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 3-5.3 mm long. (223) Second glume
ovate. (224) Second glume with trichomes <a few long hairs>. (225) Second
glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.9-1.2 mm long. (228) Rachilla
internode hairy. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230)
Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus not
differentiated. (235) Lemma (4-)4.4-6.2 mm long. (236) Lemma ovate. (237)
Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma hairy <often
densely so, over the entire surface>. (241) Lemma with trichomes on intervein
region and veins. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex acute. (244) Lemma
apex entire. (245) Lemma apex ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awned. (247) Awn
arising from the tip. (248) Awn 0.6-1.6 mm long. (249) Palea well-developed.
(250) Palea 4.3-5.4 mm long. (251) Palea with hairy veins <also hairy between
the veins>. (285) Anthers 2-3 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2.
(317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1.8-2.5 mm long. (331)
Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 42 <<Flora Europaea>>. (374) Rocky sites
<growing on stabilized, well drained sand or silt dunes, or raised beach
ridges, and in river gravels.>. (380) Limited distribution in the western
arctic islands, with several records from Victoria Island and small islands
near it. The collection from Melville Island S.A. Edlund 379A (CAN) was from
an area well used by muskoxen. The suggestion by A. Elveakk, University of
Tromso (personal communication 1991) that this species has been found on Devon
Island at Truelove Inlet, has not been confirmed. (381) Indicative of warmer
arctic environments. The rhizomes of this taxon contribute to stabilizing sand
or silt dunes in which the plants grow. (384) Festuca rubra var. arenaria, the
name used by Porsild (1964), was described based on a specimen collected in
Scandinavia, the type of which has not been examined. Whether this type falls
within the concept of that of F. rubra subsp. richardsonii has not been
investigated. This taxon is possibly also synonymous with F. rubra subsp.
arctica, but this was questioned by Tzvelev (1976). (385) F. rubra var.
arenaria (Osbeck) Th. Fr. Possibly also synonymous with F. rubra subsp.
arctica, but this was questioned by Tzvelev (1976). (431) Code used for
graphics files: poferi.


Festuca viviparoidea <s.l. Krajina ex Pavlick>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) In Can. J. Bot. 62: 2454. 1984. (5) F.
vivipara subsp. glabra Frederiksen, Nord J. Bot. 1: 288. 1985. (6) Type:
Greenland, Jameson Land, Gurreholm, 14 VIII. 1958, Holmen 807. (Holotype C).
(7) F. ovina var. vivipara L. pro parte. Sp. Pl. ed. 2, 1: 108. 1762. F.
brevifolia R. Br. var. arctica Saint-Yves subv. genuina f. vivipara
Saint-Yves, Candollea 2: 253-254. 1925. Type: Greenland. Arakamtchetchem, Herb
U.S.N. Pacif. Expl. Exp. 1853-56, leg. Wright. (Holotype: P). F. brachyphylla
f. vivipara Skvorcov. Fl. Arct. URSS. 222-223. 1964, nom. nud. F.
×viviparoidea Krajina, Biota N. Amer. 2: 342. 1980, nom. nud. F. viviparoidea
subsp. krajinae Pavlick, Can. J. Bot. 62: 2457. 1984. Type: British Columbia,
Liard River Basin, Fairy Lake, 26 July 1977, Argus and Haber 9987. (Holotype
V! Isotype CAN!). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high.
(11) Plants 11-28 cm high <bluish gray-green>. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants tufted. (29) Prophylls 10-20 mm long. (30) Prophylls with hairy
veins. (31) Prophylls with pronounced keels. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous <Canadian specimens>,
or sparsely hairy <Greenland specimens>. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or
becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the
lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous, or with trichomes <that are minute>. (74)
Sheaths hirsute. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.2-0.5 mm long. (77)
Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules hairy. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80)
Ligules apices acute. (81) Ligules erose and cleft. (82) Leaves marcescent.
(83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 3-12 cm long.
(90) Leaves 0.35-0.75 mm wide <when folded>. (91) Leaf blades without
auricles. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud <with margins inrolled and sometimes
overlapping>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the
vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or hairy. (112) Leaf blades
abaxial surface hairy. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf <usually 3 larger veins,
2-4 smaller veins>. (126) Leaf blades involute. (144) Flag leaf sheaths not
inflated. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence linear. (155)
Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 1-3 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-15
mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis scabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence
branches at lowest node 0-1 <smaller inflorescences have a single spikelet per
rachis node>. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary
branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 0.2-0.6 mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches scabrous. (185) Spikelets pedicellate
<characteristically proliferating>. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the
glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate.
(189) Spikelets 7-15 mm long <or longer, including the vegetative
proliferation>. (190) Spikelets 2-3 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 2-3.
(211) Glumes unequal. (212) First glume 0.7-0.8 × the length of the second
glume. (213) First glume 0.3-0.45 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 3-4 mm
long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous, or with
trichomes <hairs at the apex only>. (217) First glume veins 1. (218) First
glume margins ciliate. (219) First glume apex acuminate. (220) Second glume
0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long as, or
longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 3.6-6 mm long. (223) Second
glume lanceolate. (224) Second glume glabrous, or with trichomes <scabrous at
apex only>. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.1-0.3 mm
long. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla
terminating in a vestigial floret <or terminating in a vegetatively
proliferating floret>. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma 3.6-6 mm
long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled <more pronounced as lemma
structure becomes leaf-like in vegetative proliferation>. (239) Lemma surface
dull <deep purple>. (240) Lemma sparsely scaberulous. (241) Lemma with
trichomes on intervein region and veins. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex
acuminate. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma
apex awnless, or awned <often awnless in proliferating spikelets>. (247) Awn
arising from the tip. (248) Awn 0.1-0.3 mm long. (249) Palea vestigial, or
absent <rarely formed>. (285) Anthers 2 mm long <when present>. (296) Ovary
superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (360) 2n = 49, or 56 <Frederiksen 1981>. (374) Moist areas, or
hummocks <occurring in tundra turf, gravel, and moist herb mats.>. (380)
Native, High Arctic or alpine in the Rocky Mountains. (381) The phenomenon of
vegetative proliferation in grasses has been observed to be a response of
plants to environmental stresses such over watering or over fertilizing in
greenhouse conditions. If further collections of this taxon are made in the
High Arctic, very thorough habitat notes would be relevant. It is possible
that the collections to date are vegetatively proliferating plants of either
F. brachyphylla or F. baffinensis, but there has been limited material on
which to base a conclusion. (384) Porsild (1964) mentions F. vivipara (L.) Sm.
noting that the Canadian specimens are similar to F. baffinensis and F.
brachyphylla, but the panicle is always proliferous. Frederiksen (1981) stated
that “According to a handwritten note by Holmen, the chromosome number given
for Plantae Vasculares Groenlandicae Exsiccatae nr. 22 belongs to the
above-mentioned holotype. 2n = 56 was published (Holmen and Laegaard 1960),
but reexamination shows 2n = 49 to be correct, and as far as I know no other
numbers have been known from Greenland. . . 2n = 56 was found in material from
Alaska and the Island of Wrangel. This species has very often been connected
with F. brachyphylla, and morphologically it looks very much like this
species. In the few cases where anthers were observed, they were about 2 mm.
As F. brachyphylla is very distinct on account of its very short anthers,
rarely if ever exceeding 1.2 mm (Frederiksen 1977), and as F. brachyphylla has
the leaf sheaths partly split while they are always open in F. vivipara, no
close connection seems to exist between these two taxa. On the other hand F.
vivipara subsp. glabra in nearly all examined characters seems isolated from
the two other subspecies; thus it possibly has another origin.” Alexeev (1985)
published four leaf cross sections of this taxon, documenting the variation
that he observed. He elevated F. vivipara subsp. hirsuta to F. frederikseniae
E.B. Alexeev. A specimen at CAN that was annotated by Signe Frederiksen in
1987 was collected on Ellesmere Island, Lower Dumbell Lake (water supply lake
for Alert) growing in moist herbmat C.R. Harrington 201, August 18, 1959. An
extensive search in 1992 to find the voucher for the mapped record from
Ellesmere Island, Judge Daily Promitory (Frederiksen 1981) was unsuccessful.
The CAN specimen from the Canadian Arctic may be an F. baffinensis ×F.
brachyphylla hybrid. The plants have very young inflorescences with few
definitive characteristics. (385) Porsild (1964) mentions F. vivipara (L.) Sm.
noting that the Canadian specimens are similar to F. baffinensis and F.
brachyphylla, but the panicle is always proliferous. A specimen at CAN that
was annotated by Signe Frederiksen in 1987 was collected on Ellesmere Island,
Lower Dumbell Lake (water supply lake for Alert) growing in moist herbmat C.R.
Harrington 201, August 18, 1959. An extensive search in 1992 to find the
voucher for the mapped record from Ellesmere Island, Judge Daily Promitory
(Frederiksen 1981) was unsuccessful. The CAN specimen from the Canadian Arctic
may be an F. baffinensis ×F. brachyphylla hybrid. The plants have very young
inflorescences with few definitive characteristics. Alexeev (1985) published
four leaf cross sections of this taxon, documenting the variation that he
observed. (431) Code used for graphics files: pofevi.


Hierochloë alpina <(Swartz) Roem. and Schult.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Syst. Veg. 2: 515. 1817. (5) Holcus
alpinus Swartz in Willd., Sp. Pl. 4: 937. 1806. (6) Type: Sweden: Lapland,
Willdenow 18699. (Holotype: B). (7) Holcus monticola Bigelow, New England J.
Med. and Surg. 5: 334. 1816. Hierochloë monticola (Bigelow) A. Löve and D.
Löve, Taxon 13: 201. 1964. Anthoxanthum monticolum (Bigelow) Veldkamp in
Schouten and Veldkamp, Blumea 30: 347. 1985. Type: United States: New
Hampshire: White Hills, Mount Washington, Bigelow s.n. (GH, holotype,
according to Schouten and Veldkamp 1985, not located Sept. 1994). Hierochloë
alpina f. soperi Polunin, Bull. Natl. Mus. Canada 92 (Biol. Ser. 24): 43.
1940. Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Baffin Island, Nettilling Lake, 9 July 1925, J. D.
Soper 125699. (Holotype: CAN!). Hierochloë orthantha T.J. Sorensen, Meddel.
Grønland 136: 3. 1954. Hierochloë alpina subsp. orthantha (T.J. Sorensen)
Weim., Bot. Not. 124: 161. 1971. Hierochloë alpina var. orthantha (T.J.
Sorensen) Hultén, Ofvers. Forh. Kongl. Svenska Vetensk. Akad. 8: 20. 1962.
Type: Greenland: Tunugdliarfik Fjord, B.W.I. (Kiagtût.) Elyna-Hede, Löss.
8.7.1947, Sorensen 124. (Holotype: C, Weimarck, 1971; Isotype: DAO!, Paratype:
DAO, “Amer. Gr. Nat. Herb. no. 438”). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or
more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 7-40 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants tufted, or forming loose clusters. (21) Plants with short
horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous <culms are often pulled out of the
tundra with much of the base of the plant and the rhizomes left behind>. (23)
Rhizomes compacted <and short>. (24) Rhizomes 2 mm wide <short>. (25) Rhizome
scales striate. (26) Rhizome scales 20 mm long. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not
exposed. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with
the margins fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous, or with
trichomes. (74) Sheaths scabrous <short>. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules
0.2-1 mm long. (77) Ligules a fringed membrane <or a fringe of hairs>. (78)
Ligules hairy <sometimes with long ciliate hairs on the adaxial surface near
the apex>. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong, or not applicable. (80) Ligules apices
truncate. (81) Ligules erose to lacerate. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves
mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 1-12 cm long. (90) Leaves
(0.7-)1.4-3.4 mm wide <0.7 mm when rolled>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading
from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially hairy <sparsely puberulent>.
(112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein conspicuously larger than the lateral
veins <with a ridge of sclerenchyma opposite the midvein>. (126) Leaf blades
flat, or involute. (144) Flag leaf sheaths not inflated. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence ovate. (155) Inflorescence dense, or diffuse.
(160) Inflorescence 1.5-3 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 12-20 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at
lowest node 1-2. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with spreading secondary
branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 2.4-12 mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186)
Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally
compressed. (188) Spikelets ovate, or obovate. (189) Spikelets 5-7.2 mm long.
(190) Spikelets 2.5-6 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 3 <the lower 2
staminate, terminal spikelet hermaphrodite>. (211) Glumes shiny, cuneate.
(212) First glume 0.9-0.95 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume
0.9-0.95 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 4.8-6.7 mm long. (215) First
glume ovate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1-3. (218)
First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acute. (220) Second glume
as long, or longer than the spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long as, or
longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 5-7 mm long. (223) Second
glume ovate. (224) Second glume glabrous <shiny>. (225) Second glume veins
1-3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.1 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous.
(229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla terminating
in a well-formed floret. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma 3.6-4 mm
long. (236) Lemma ovate <hermaphrodite floret>, or lanceolate <staminate
florets>. (237) Lemma keeled. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma hairy.
(241) Lemma with trichomes on intervein region and veins <staminate lemmas
hairy over entire surface, hermaphrodite lemmas with a tuft of long hairs near
apex, elsewhere glabrous>. (242) Lemma veins 3. (243) Lemma apex acute. (244)
Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awned. (247) Awn
arising from below the apex but above the middle <staminate florets>. (248)
Awn 0.5-1.5 mm long. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 3.3-4.4 mm long.
(251) Palea with hairy veins <at apex>. (285) Anthers 1.5-2.7 mm long. (296)
Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327)
Fruit 2.8-3 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 56, 64, 71, 74, 75,
76, 77, and 78 <2n = 56, was reported by Bowden (1960b) for plants from Baffin
and Southhampton Islands and Whiteface Mt. N.Y. Facultatively apomictic>.
(373) Substrate type: halophytic. (374) Sand <occurring sporadically on
well-drained, weakly acidic to neutral sand, gravel, and rocky barrens. Often
the only grass in dense Low Arctic tundra.>. (380) A circumpolar,
arctic-alpine species. (381) Indicative of climax Low Arctic tundra usually
completely stablized and with 90-100% ground cover. This is one of the few
grasses that can compete in such tundras where willows or arctic birch are
usually dominant. (384) Weimark (1971), distinguished two subspecies, (a)
subsp. alpina, recognized by the characters: the awn of the upper staminate
floret inserted (0.9-)1.3-2.1(-2.5) mm above the lemma base, awn usually
twisted at base and geniculate, from (b) subsp. orthantha, where the awn of
the upper male floret is inserted (2.2-)2.6-4.0(-4.5) mm above the lemma base,
and straight. Subspecies orthantha has been recorded from Alaska, Greenland,
Northern Laborador and Quebec, but not from the Canadian Arctic Archipelago.
Veldkamp (in Schouten and Veldcamp 1985) aligned many Hierochloë taxa with the
genus Anthoxanthum, and this taxon became A. monticolum (Bigelow) Veldkamp;
annotated thus on the type specimen, but this has not been widely taken up.
(385) Schouten and Veldkamp (1985) transferred this species to the genus
Anthoxanthum as A. monticolum (Bigelow) Veldkamp but this has not been widely
taken up. (431) Code used for graphics files: pohial.


Hierochloë pauciflora <R. Br.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Chlor. Melvill. 35. 1823. (5)
Anthoxanthum arcticum Veldkamp in Schouten and Veldkamp, Blumea 30: 349. 1985.
(6) Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Melville Island, 1819-1820, Mr. Beverly, on W.E.
Parry’s first voyage. (Holotype: BM!). (7) Hierochloë pauciflora f. setigera
E. Lepage, Nat. Canad. 81: 256. 1954. Type: Canada. Ontario: Cape Henrietta,
10 Aug. 1953, A. Dutilly and E. Lepage 31124. (Holotype: CAN!). (10) Plants
less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 5-26 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (21) Plants with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants
rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes elongate. (24) Rhizomes 0.3-1 mm wide. (25) Rhizome
scales smooth. (26) Rhizome scales 10-20 mm long. (27) Rhizome scales
glabrous. (32) Stems erect <appearing tiny and delicate>. (35) Stems circular
or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed.
(68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the
margins fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules
present. (76) Ligules 0.4-1.3 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous <on uppermost
leaves or underdeveloped leaf blades; a fringed membrane on lower leaf
blades>. (78) Ligules glabrous, or hairy. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong. (80)
Ligules apices obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83)
Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 2-5.5
cm long. (90) Leaves 0.7-2 mm wide <rolled width>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in
bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or
spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially hairy. (112) Leaf
blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120)
Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf
blades involute <but easily twisting to appear conduplicate in a wet cross
section>. (144) Flag leaf sheaths inflated. (151) Inflorescence paniculate
<sometimes reduced and spike-like>. (154) Inflorescence linear. (155)
Inflorescence dense <compact>. (160) Inflorescence 1-3 cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 3-5 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164)
Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 1. (165) Inflorescence primary
branches with appressed secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary
branches 0.5-12 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187)
Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets ovate, or obovate. (189)
Spikelets 3.5-6 mm long. (190) Spikelets 2-4 mm wide. (191) Florets per
spikelet 3 <the 2 lower staminate, the terminal spikelet hermaphrodite>. (211)
Glumes shiny, cuneate. (212) First glume 0.8-1 × the length of the second
glume. (213) First glume 0.75-0.85 × spikelet length. (214) First glume
2.9-4.6 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous.
(217) First glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First
glume apex acute. (220) Second glume as long, or longer than the spikelet.
(221) Second glume almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222)
Second glume 3.5-4.7 mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate, or ovate. (224)
Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode
0.1 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla not pronounced
between the florets. (230) Rachilla terminating in a well-formed floret. (231)
Callus differentiated, or not differentiated <sometimes there are a few sparse
callus hairs at base of staminate florets>. (234) Callus hairs shorter than
the floret. (235) Lemma 2.9-4.4 mm long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma
rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma hairy <at apex>.
(241) Lemma with trichomes on intervein region and veins. (242) Lemma veins
3-6. (243) Lemma apex acute. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex ciliate
<very sparsely>. (246) Lemma apex awnless <or awns on staminate florets to 1
mm long>. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 2.4-3.2 mm long. (251) Palea
with hairy veins. (285) Anthers 1.5-3 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309)
Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 2.5 mm long.
(331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28 <Löve and Löve 1975, 4 records>. (373)
Substrate type: acidic. (374) Moist areas, or hummocks <Growing on acidic, wet
peaty soils, on fluvial deltas and lowlands. When it is present in the High
Arctic it occurs in areas underlain by carbonates and it is exclusively rooted
in thick, mossy, mats particularly of Drepanocladus species. In the Low Arctic
it occurs with sphagnum and in wet tundra.>. (381) This tiny, delicate grass,
is easily out competed by other species, is indicative of acidic, wet peaty
soils with vegetation cover usually less than 15 cm high. (384) This tiny
grass often occurs as single plants and is easily overlooked. Schouten and
Veldkamp (1985) transferred this species to the genus Anthoxanthum as A.
arcticum Veldkamp but this has not been widely taken up. (385) Schouten and
Veldkamp (1985) transferred this species to the genus Anthoxanthum as A.
arcticum Veldkamp but this has not been widely taken up. (428) This name is
used in Porsild (1964). (431) Code used for graphics files: pohipa.


Hordeum jubatum <L.>

      (1) Foxtail barley. (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Sp. Pl. Vol. 1: 85.
1753. (5) Elymus jubatus Link, Hort. Regius Bot. Berol. 1: 19. 1827. Critesion
jubatum Nevski in Komarov, Fl. USSR 2: 721. 1934. (6) Type: “Habitat in Canada
Kalm ”. (7) Hordeum caespitosum Scribn. in Pammel, Proc. Davenport Acad. Nat.
Sci. 7: 245. 1899. H. jubatum var. caespitosum A.S. Hitchc., Proc. Biol. Soc.
Wash. 41: 160. 1928. (U.S.A. Wyoming: Geranium Park, July 1897, Pammel 157).
(10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
(20-)30-70 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (29)
Prophylls 10 mm long <approximately>. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins. (31)
Prophylls lacking pronounced keels. (32) Stems erect, or decumbent. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes
becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-3. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the
lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.5-1 mm
long. (77) Ligules a fringed membrane. (78) Ligules hairy. (79) Ligules
transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices truncate. (81) Ligules erose. (82)
Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves
alternate. (89) Leaves 5-20 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.5-4(-5) mm wide. (91) Leaf
blades without auricles. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades
linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem. (107) Leaf blades adaxially
scabrous, or hairy <with long trichomes>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface
scabrous, or hairy <with long trichomes>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel.
(120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126)
Leaf blades flat, or involute. (151) Inflorescence spicate <the spikelets
forming a triad at each node with the central one fertile and usually sessile;
the lateral ones pedicellate, and usually sterile>. (154) Inflorescence
lanceolate. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 4-10 cm long
<excluding awns>. (161) Inflorescence 40-80 mm wide <including awns>. (162)
Inflorescence main axis hairy. (185) Spikelets pedicellate <lateral spikelets
borne on curved pedicels, 0.7-1.2 mm long>, or sessile <central fertile
floret>. (186) Spikelets disarticulating at the nodes of the main axis <above
each node, the rachis segment remaining at the base of the spikelet triad>.
(187) Spikelets dorsoventrally compressed <fertile spikelet>. (188) Spikelets
ovate <fertile spikelet>. (189) Spikelets 5.5-8 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1-1.5
mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 1 <for each member of the triad>. (212)
First glume 1 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 1 × spikelet
length. (214) First glume 25-60(-150) mm long. (215) First glume linear. (216)
First glume with trichomes. (217) First glume veins 1. (218) First glume
margins ciliate. (219) First glume apex acuminate. (220) Second glume as long,
or longer than the spikelet <awn-like>. (221) Second glume almost as long as,
or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 25-60(-150) mm long.
(223) Second glume linear. (224) Second glume with trichomes. (225) Second
glume veins 1. (226) Rachilla internode 0.3-0.5 mm long. (228) Rachilla
internode scabrous. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230)
Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret <awn-like, sometimes with a
rudimentary floret>. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma 5.5-8 mm
long. (236) Lemma elliptic. (237) Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma
surface dull. (240) Lemma glabrous. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex
acuminate. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma
apex awned. (247) Awn arising from the tip. (248) Awn 10-60 mm long. (249)
Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 5-7.5 mm long <subequal to lemma>. (251)
Palea with glabrous veins. (285) Anthers 1-1.5 mm long. (296) Ovary superior.
(309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 6-8 mm
long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (381) This introduced species could be
indicative of Hudson Bay store activity in an area in the past, or Northern
Store activity in the present, as freighter canoes built in Quebec near
Montreal, are packed with straw for shipping and foxtail barley seed may be
present in that straw. (384) This species was first collected in the Arctic
Islands in 1986, as an apparently accidental introduction at Apex, Frobisher
Bay, Baffin Island (63°43'N, 68°27’W), outside the former Hudson Bay Manager’s
house. It is suggested that it was introduced in straw used packing freighter
canoes shipped north from near Montreal. The introduction is suspected to have
occurred in the late 1960’s when straw was fed to a goat tethered where the
plants were found, and not burned as was the usual practice. Plants were
observed in 1986 and 1989, but they are no longer extant due to human activity
in the area. The plants when observed were flourishing and the species would
be expected to do well if introduced at other sites. (385) One record of an
accidental introduction was observed 1986-1989 at Apex, Frobisher Bay, Baffin
Island (63°43’N, 68°27’W), but possibly introduced in the late 1960’s. There
are many sites in the Arctic Islands where this species would be expected to
thrive if introduced. (431) Code used for graphics files: pohoju.


Leymus mollis <(Trin.) Pilger>

      (1) Sea lyme-grass. (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Bot. Mag. (Tokyo) 52:
232. 1938. (5) Elymus arenarius L. subsp. mollis (Trin.) Hultén. Leymus mollis
(Trin.) Hara. invalidly published. Löve, A. Feddes Repetorium 95: 425-521.
1985. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
15-55 cm high <to 100 cm, but rarely as tall north of 60°N in the Canadian
Arctic Archipelago>. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous <growing as an active sand binder>. (23) Rhizomes elongate.
(24) Rhizomes 1-3 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales smooth <but veins prominent>.
(26) Rhizome scales 20-35 mm long. (27) Rhizome scales glabrous. (32) Stems
erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems densely hairy.
(37) Culm nodes not exposed. (39) Culm nodes rooting at the lower nodes. (68)
Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins
fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present.
(76) Ligules 0.5-1 mm long. (77) Ligules a fringed membrane. (78) Ligules
hairy. (79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices truncate. (81)
Ligules erose. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems
<sometimes appearing basal in a moving sand habitat>. (84) Leaves alternate.
(89) Leaves 6.5-17 cm long. (90) Leaves 2-9 mm wide. (91) Leaf blades with
blade auricles <an extension of the collar>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical. (107)
Leaf blades adaxially scabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous
<sometimes glaucous>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat
<usually>, or folded <rolling on drying>. (144) Flag leaf sheaths inflated
<uppermost culm leaf only>. (151) Inflorescence spicate. (154) Inflorescence
linear. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 5-9.5 cm long <in the
arctic islands, elsewhere to 15 cm long>. (161) Inflorescence 10-20 mm wide.
(162) Inflorescence main axis hairy. (185) Spikelets sessile. (186) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188)
Spikelets lanceolate. (189) Spikelets 10-21 mm long. (190) Spikelets 2-3.5 mm
wide. (191) Florets per spikelet (1-)2-3(-4). (212) First glume 0.85-1 × the
length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.9-1 × spikelet length <as long
as spikelet>. (214) First glume 9.5-17 mm long. (215) First glume linear.
(216) First glume with trichomes <hairy>. (217) First glume veins 1-3. (218)
First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acuminate. (220) Second
glume as long, or longer than the spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long
as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 10-19 mm long. (223)
Second glume linear. (224) Second glume <densely pubescent>. (225) Second
glume veins 1-3(-5). (226) Rachilla internode 2-4 mm long. (228) Rachilla
internode hairy. (229) Rachilla pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla
extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235)
Lemma 8.6-18.5 mm long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma rounded on the
back. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma hairy. (242) Lemma veins (4-)7.
(243) Lemma apex acuminate <attenuate>. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma
apex ciliate <densely pubescent>. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea
well-developed. (250) Palea 8.8-14 mm long. (251) Palea with hairy veins.
(285) Anthers 4.5-7 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317)
Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 7-10 mm long <<arctic?>>. (331)
Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28 <Tzvelev (1976)>. (373) Substrate type:
halophytic. (374) Sand <littoral, growing on dunes and sandy places near
seashore, or lake shores. Common on sandy beaches of Frobisher Bay, e.g. near
the Hudson Bay Store, Apex, and at Peter Head.>. (380) Circumpolar, Low
Arctic. (381) When this sand binder species that naturally grows near the high
tide line is found inland, it is usually indicative that gravel from a nearby
beach has been moved and used as land fill. The species becomes weaker away
from the influence of moving sand and when transplanted inland, dies out after
a few seasons. (384) Lectotype from Aleutian Islands, possible isotype LE.
This species is a member of the grass tribe Triticeae, where there has been
much discussion about generic alignments, see for example the synonymy for
Elymus alaskanus. (385) Synonym Elymus arenarius subsp. mollis (Trin.) Hultén,
in Porsild (1964). (431) Code used for graphics files: polemo.


Phippsia algida <(Sol.) R. Br.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Chlor. Melvill. 27. 1823. (5) Agrostis
algida Sol. in Phipps, Voy. North Pole 200. 1774. Catabrosa algida (Sol.) Fr.,
Nov. fl. suec. mant. 3: 174. 1843. (6) Type: Described from Spitzbergen (BM).
(7) Phippsia algida f. vestita Holmb., Bot. Not. 130. 1924. Catabrosa algida
f. vestita (Holmb.) Polunin, Bull. Natl. Mus. Canada 92 (Biol. Ser. 24): 62.
1940. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
(2-)3.5-15 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (29)
Prophylls 4-10 mm long. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins. (31) Prophylls
lacking pronounced keels <veins prominent, but not keeled>. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not
exposed. (39) Culm nodes not rooting at the lower nodes <culms often forming a
flat mat against the tundra early in the season, becoming erect at anthesis>.
(68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the
margins fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules
present. (76) Ligules (0.3-)0.5-1(-1.6) mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78)
Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules <triangular <Flora Europaea>>. (80) Ligules
apices acute. (81) Ligules entire. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems, or mostly basal <appearing basal in plants less
than 5 cm high, cauline in plants 12-20 cm>. (84) Leaves alternate. (89)
Leaves 0.6-2.8 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.2-3 mm wide <when flat>. (92) Leaf
blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to
the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially
glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein conspicuously larger than the
lateral veins, or midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (121)
Leaf blades bulliform cells in distinct rows on either side of the midvein.
(126) Leaf blades flat, or folded. (144) Flag leaf sheaths not inflated
<uppermost culm leaf sheath somewhat inflated>. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence linear, or ovate <branches appressed usually,
or spreading, particularly at anthesis>. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160)
Inflorescence (0.5-)1-2(-3) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 3-7 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at
lowest node 3-8. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary
branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches (0.9-)3-8(-9.5) mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186)
Spikelets disarticulating at the base of the spikelet. (187) Spikelets
laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate to ovate. (189) Spikelets
(1.5-)3-7(-10) mm long. (190) Spikelets 0.5-0.8 mm wide. (191) Florets per
spikelet 1. (211) Glumes caducous (falling early). (212) First glume 0.02-0.03
× the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.2-0.35 × spikelet
length. (214) First glume 0.05-0.2 mm long. (215) First glume ovate. (216)
First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 0. (218) First glume margins
glabrous. (219) First glume apex obtuse. (220) Second glume 0.4 × as long as
the spikelet or less. (221) Second glume shorter than the lowest floret. (222)
Second glume 0.3-0.6 mm long. (223) Second glume ovate. (224) Second glume
glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 0. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between
the florets. (230) Rachilla terminating in a well-formed floret. (235) Lemma
1.3-1.6(-1.8) mm long. (236) Lemma ovate <broadly so>. (237) Lemma rounded on
the back <floret laterally compressed, but not strongly keeled>. (239) Lemma
surface dull. (240) Lemma glabrous, or sparsely scaberulous <on the lower
half, hairs if present are on the veins>. (242) Lemma veins 1-3. (243) Lemma
apex acute, or rounded. (244) Lemma apex entire, or lacerate. (245) Lemma apex
ciliate <sparsely>, or not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea
well-developed. (250) Palea 1.1-1.3 mm long <almost as long as the lemma>.
(251) Palea with glabrous veins. (285) Anthers (0.3-)0.5-0.7 mm long. (296)
Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327)
Fruit 1.2-1.9 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28 <<Flora
Europaea>>. (373) Substrate type: acidic, or calcareous, or halophytic, or
nitrophilous. (374) Moist areas, or hummocks <This is one of the first grasses
to flower and set seed, which may contribute to it being an early colonizer of
disturbed zones, both those made by human activities and those associated with
permanent or late lying snow beds. Phippsia algidais highly nitrophilous, can
tolerate highly alkaline soils, peat, imperfectly drained silts, and clays,
such as mudflats in ephemeral river channels. It is found along lake shores at
the base of colluvial slopes, in sandy and marshy places, generally on neutral
to weakly alkaline terrain.>. (380) Circumpolar and widespread in the High
Arctic. (381) This species is an early colonizer of disturbed soil. It occurs
on bare ground around the town of Iqaluit, Baffin Island, particularly close
to human habitation by the shoreline. In this town when Phippsia was found
away from the shoreline the area had been built up with material brought in
from near the beach. Phippsia was observed 350 m above sea level on Melville
Island as the only vascular plant present in a rocky area where even lichens
were sparse. (384) Canadian specimens of Phippsia sometimes have lemmas with a
few conspicuous hairs towards the base, but the lemmas never become “densely
and stiffly hairy in the lower half” (Tutin 1980) as they do in the European
P. concinna (Th. Fr.) Lindeb. That taxon is also distinguished by having a
distinctly open panicle. No specimens assignable to P. concinna have been seen
among Canadian records at CAN or DAO, although some specimens with slightly
hairy lemmas have been so labelled. They would be better assigned to f.
vestita Holmb. Grulke and Bliss (1988) in a study of comparative life history
characteristics of two High Arctic grasses noted that Phippsia algida is a
ruderal species that colonizes bare soil in mesic sites, but also occurs
across a broad range of habitats. Phippsia was observed to experience more
frequent and severe drought stress at less extreme physical conditions than
Puccinellia vaginata, the species it was being compared with. Drought stress
and low temperatures reduced whole plant biomass of Phippsia of all ages in
the study. Grulke and Bliss (1988) found that Phippsia was relatively short
lived (living on average 23 years and a maximum of 34 years). They noted that
the mean age of initial reproduction was relatively late when compared to
temperate species, that is 17 + or - 6 years. Under all the field conditions
monitored Phippsia had high, constant seed set. In short growing seasons,
Phippsia continued high carbon allocation to reproduction, but also had high
rates of plant mortality. The authors concluded that Phippsia algida has many
characteristics of a ruderal and fills this role in a High Arctic ecosystem.
The first author has found plants of Phippsia to be one of the most difficult
grasses to transplant to a greenhouse in the south, on three separate
occasions. Although several plants were brought south they did not survive
more than 2-3 weeks after being removed from an arctic environment. This
species is possibly the first arctic grass to flower and set seed and appears
to do so before mid-August in most habitats. On Herschel Island in July 1988,
Phippsia had flowered and was setting seed before other grasses in the area
were at anthesis. In the former Soviet Union this species is considered to
produce good pasture plants when fertilized (Tzvelev 1976). In Canada, the
usually small plants, 5-10 cm high, are larger when they receive additional
nutrients, see for example plants growing near the sewage lagoon in Iqaluit.
(385) Canadian specimens of Phippsia sometimes have lemmas with a few
conspicuous hairs towards the base, but they never become “densely and stiffly
hairy in the lower half” (Tutin 1980) as do lemmas in the European P. concinna
(Th. Fr.) Lindeb. No specimens assignable to P. concinna have been seen among
Canadian records at CAN or DAO, although some specimens with slightly hairy
lemmas have been so labelled. They would be better assigned to f. vestita
Holmb. (428) This name is used in Porsild (1964). (431) Code used for graphics
files: pophal.


Pleuropogon sabinii <R. Br.>

      (1) Semaphore grass. (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Chlor. Melvill. 31.
1823. (6) Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Melville Island, Sabine et al. W. E. Parry’s
voyage, 1819-1820. (Isotype: GH!). (7) Pleuropogon sabinii f. aquaticus
Simmons, Rep. 2nd Norwegian Arct. Exp. Fram, 2: 170. 1906. Type: Canada.
N.W.T.: Ellesmere Island, Fram Fjord, (“in lacubus, rivulis, etc.” 26 Aug.
1899, H.G. Simmons 1600. (Isotype: GH!). P. sabinii f. terrestris Simmons.
Rep. 2nd Norwegeian Arct. Exp. Fram 2: 170. 1906. Type: Canada. N.W.T.:
“Ellesmerelandiae, In sinu Fram Fjord,” 26 Aug. 1899. H.G. Simmons 1666.
(Isotype CAN!). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high.
(11) Plants 4-30 cm high <emergent>. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (21) Plants
with conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes elongate. (24) Rhizomes 1-2 mm wide. (25)
Rhizome scales smooth. (26) Rhizome scales 10-40 mm long. (27) Rhizome scales
glabrous. (32) Stems erect, or decumbent. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed <when culms emerge>,
or becoming exposed <when culms remain submerged>. (38) Culm nodes number
visible 0-3. (39) Culm nodes rooting at the lower nodes. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused to the apex.
(73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.9-2.7(-3.5) mm
long. (77) Ligules membranous, or a fringed membrane <on the isotype>. (78)
Ligules glabrous, or hairy. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules apices
obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed
along the stems <submerged leaves lax and floating, emergent leaves erect>.
(84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 2-23 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.5-3 mm wide
<when flat>. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96)
Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf
blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein conspicuously larger
than the lateral veins <sometimes with an associated thickened ridge of tissue
below the abaxial surface>. (121) Leaf blades bulliform cells in distinct rows
on either side of the midvein. (126) Leaf blades flat, or folded. (151)
Inflorescence racemose <with long spikes arranged as though signalling
semaphore>. (154) Inflorescence linear. (155) Inflorescence diffuse. (160)
Inflorescence 3-6.5(-8) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 2-7 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at
lowest node 1. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating
above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets
oblong. (189) Spikelets 8-18 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.7-5 mm wide. (191)
Florets per spikelet 6-10. (212) First glume 0.4-0.9 × the length of the
second glume. (213) First glume 0.1-0.2 × spikelet length. (214) First glume
1.3-1.6 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate, or ovate. (216) First glume
glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1 <faint>. (218) First glume margins
glabrous. (219) First glume apex obtuse. (220) Second glume 0.4 × as long as
the spikelet or less. (221) Second glume shorter than the lowest floret. (222)
Second glume 1.5-3(-4.3) mm long. (223) Second glume ovate. (224) Second glume
glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.8-1.3 mm
long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between
the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231)
Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma 3.5-4.7 mm long. (236) Lemma
oblanceolate. (237) Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240)
Lemma sparsely scaberulous. (241) Lemma with trichomes on intervein region and
veins. (242) Lemma veins (6-)7. (243) Lemma apex rounded, or truncate. (244)
Lemma apex entire, or erose, or lacerate. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246)
Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 3.4-4.5 mm long.
(251) Palea with scabrous veins <a dark purple, scabrous, awn 1.5-2 mm long
arises near the base of each palea keel and often protrudes from the edges of
the spikelet>. (285) Anthers 1.6-2.6 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309)
Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 2-2.2 mm long.
(331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 42 <Bowden 1960a>. (374) Aquatic <Plants
grow in the shallow waters of ponds, lakes, or sluggish streams, or on poorly
drained soils around ephemeral ponds and terrain that is flooded earlier in
the summer. On soft muddy shores of small sheltered ponds plants of this
species may form pure stands. Pleuropogon sabinii has been found in the small
pond used as a water reservoir by Parks Canada at Tanquary Fiord, Ellesmere
Island, 81°N, 79°45'W, and is common in the ponds to the west of the Polar
Continental Shelf Base, at Resolute, Cornwallis Island 71°41'N, 94°54'W.>.
(380) Amphi-Atlantic, High Arctic. (381) Indicative of low lying areas where
water accumulates for much of the growing season and the substrate remains
damp all season. (384) This species has the the most northern distribution for
an emergent grass. Data for Canadian samples suggests some specimens are
larger plants than those that occur in Europe. In the literature (e.g. Porsild
1964) the species name is often sabinei as the taxon was named for the Arctic
explorer Edward Sabine. However, “sabinii” appears to have been a deliberate
latinizing of the name by Robert Brown and according to the International Code
of Botanical Nomenclature, Articles 60,1 and 60,3 the original spelling should
be maintained (Greuter et al. 1994). (385) As Pleuropogon sabinei R. Br. with
the “ei” ending in Porsild (1964). The taxon was named for the Arctic explorer
Sabine which explains the use of sabinei. However, sabinii appears to have
been a deliberate latinizing of the name by Robert Brown when he described the
species. (431) Code used for graphics files: poplsa.


Poa <L.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more
than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 5-23-65 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants tufted, or forming loose clusters. (21) Plants with conspicuously
long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems, or without easily seen
horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes compacted. (24)
Rhizomes 0.5-0.55-0.6 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales grooved. (26) Rhizome
scales 0.5-1.25-2 mm long. (27) Rhizome scales glabrous. (29) Prophylls
3-10-20 mm long. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins, or with scabrous veins.
(31) Prophylls with pronounced keels, or lacking pronounced keels. (32) Stems
erect, or decumbent. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems
glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes
number visible 0-3. (39) Culm nodes not rooting at the lower nodes. (68)
Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins
fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present.
(76) Ligules 0.4-1.9-5 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules
glabrous, or hairy. (79) Ligules linear, or lanceolate, or ovate-oblong, or
transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices acuminate, or acute, or obtuse, or
truncate. (81) Ligules entire, or erose, or lacerate. (82) Leaves marcescent.
(83) Leaves distributed along the stems <rarely>, or mostly basal <usually>.
(84) Leaves alternate. (85) Leaves distinctly distichous <rarely>, or not
distinctly distichous <usually>. (89) Leaves 0.5-7-31 cm long. (90) Leaves
0.4-1-2 mm wide. (91) Leaf blades with sheath auricles, or without auricles.
(92) Leaf blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades
appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades
adaxially glabrous, or scabrous, or hairy. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface
glabrous, or scabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein conspicuously larger than the lateral veins, or midvein similar in
size to other veins in the leaf. (121) Leaf blades bulliform cells in distinct
rows on either side of the midvein, or without bulliform cells in a distinct
row on either side of the midvein. (126) Leaf blades flat, or folded <with
boat shaped tips>. (144) Flag leaf sheaths inflated, or not inflated. (151)
Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence linear, or lanceolate, or ovate.
(160) Inflorescence 0.3-4-13 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 2.4-23-70 mm wide.
(162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous, or scabrous. (164) Number of
inflorescence branches at lowest node 1-4. (165) Inflorescence primary
branches with appressed secondary branches, or with spreading secondary
branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 2-14-50 mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches smooth, or scabrous. (185) Spikelets
pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets
laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets obovate. (189) Spikelets 3.7-5.4-7.3 mm
long. (190) Spikelets 1.2-2.8-5.6 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 2-6.
(212) First glume 0.7-0.89-1 × the length of the second glume. (213) First
glume 0.4-0.6-0.8 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 1.9-3.2-5 mm long.
(215) First glume lanceolate, or ovate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217)
First glume veins 1-3. (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume
apex acute. (220) Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221) Second
glume almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume
2.2-3.7-5 mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate, or ovate, or oblanceolate.
(224) Second glume glabrous, or with trichomes. (225) Second glume veins 3.
(226) Rachilla internode 0.6-1.1-1.8 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode
glabrous. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla
extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated, or not
differentiated. (233) Callus hairs 1.5-1.75-2 mm long. (234) Callus hairs
shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 2.7-3.9-5.3 mm long. (236) Lemma ovate,
or lanceolate, or oblanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled, or rounded on the back.
(239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma hairy. (241) Lemma with trichomes on
intervein region and veins. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex acute, or
rounded, or truncate. (244) Lemma apex entire, or erose. (245) Lemma apex
ciliate <usually>, or not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea
well-developed. (250) Palea 2.3-3.3-4.5 mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous
veins, or with hairy veins. (285) Anthers 0.6-1.5-2.3 mm long. (296) Ovary
superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit
1.4-1.9-2.5 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28-84 <127>. (373)
Substrate type: halophytic. (384) Restricted generic description combining
data for the taxa occurring in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, using INTKEY.
(385) Restricted generic description combining data for the taxa occurring in
the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, using INTKEY. (425) Genus. (431) Code used
for graphics files: popo.


Poa abbreviata <R. Br.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Chlor. Melvill. 29. 1823. (6) Type:
Canada. N.W.T.: Melville Island, Mr. (Rev. G.) Fisher, on W.E. Parry’s first
voyage, 1819-1820. (Holotype: BM!). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more
than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 5-15(-20) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants tufted <often forming compact tussocks, branching intravaginal>.
(29) Prophylls 11-15 mm long. (30) Prophylls with scabrous veins <minute
trichomes>. (31) Prophylls with pronounced keels <as pronounced as in a
2-keeled palea>. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed. (68) Sheaths
abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only
in the lower part <1/10 to 1/4>. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present.
(76) Ligules 0.4-0.7(-3) mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules
glabrous. (79) Ligules lanceolate. (80) Ligules apices acute. (81) Ligules
lacerate. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (89) Leaves 1-7 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.4-0.7 mm wide <when rolled>.
(92) Leaf blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades
appressed to the stem. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades
abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf
blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (121) Leaf blades
bulliform cells in distinct rows on either side of the midvein <relatively
small cells>. (126) Leaf blades folded <usually, rarely flat>. (144) Flag leaf
sheaths inflated <flag leaf blade appressed to the stem>. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence ovate <ellipsoid, sometimes scarcely exserted
above the uppermost culm leaf>. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence
(0.5-)1.2-2.2 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 4-10 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence
main axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 1-3.
(165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches. (166)
Inflorescence primary branches 2-8 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary
branches smooth. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating
above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed <purple or pale green,
illustrated in database>. (188) Spikelets ovate. (189) Spikelets (3-)4.5-7.1
mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.5-3.3 mm wide <at anthesis>. (191) Florets per
spikelet 2-4(-5). (212) First glume 0.85-1 × the length of the second glume.
(213) First glume 0.6-0.7 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 3-4.6 mm long.
(215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume
veins 1 <glumes often purple tinged with hyaline margins>. (218) First glume
margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acuminate, or acute. (220) Second
glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long as,
or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 3.4-4.6 mm long. (223)
Second glume lanceolate, or ovate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second
glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 1 mm long <approximately>. (228)
Rachilla internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the
florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus
differentiated <rarely, as a vestige of a web, slightly separated from the
appressed tuft of hairs of at the base of the lemma>, or not differentiated.
(233) Callus hairs 0.3 mm long <approximately>. (234) Callus hairs shorter
than the floret. (235) Lemma (2.5-)3.6-4.6 mm long. (236) Lemma lanceolate.
(237) Lemma keeled <laterally compressed but not strongly keeled>. (239) Lemma
surface dull <apical margins thinner in texture than the body of the lemma>.
(240) Lemma hairy <the lower half of the lemma is covered with dense, short
appressed hairs on and between the veins>. (242) Lemma veins 5 <or 4, not
reaching the apex>. (243) Lemma apex truncate <obliquely>. (244) Lemma apex
entire. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 3 mm
long <approx>. (251) Palea with scabrous veins. (285) Anthers (0.2-)0.6-1.2 mm
long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a
caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1.4-1.6 mm long <approx>. (331) Fruit indehiscent.
(360) 2n = 28, 42, 70, and 76 <Löve and Löve 1975>. (373) Substrate type:
calcareous <moderately>. (374) Moist areas <often growing near the sea as on
the beach ridges near the shoreline at the Thule site, Resolute Bay,
Cornwallis Island. Found in moist to well-drained, weakly to moderately
alkaline silt and sand tills and on highly weathered Palaeozoic rocks.
Occasionally found in dwarf shrub or Saxifraga oppositifolia barrens. It is
locally abundant around bird perches and animal burrows.>. (380) This is a
circumpolar, High Arctic species. (381) Plants usually grow in relatively
isolated clumps behaving as early colonizers of weakly to moderately alkaline
silt and sand. They provide nurse crop shelter for other larger species that
eventually outcompete them in establishing ground cover. (384) There has been
constant agreement that this is a distinct species (Porsild 1964, Edmonson
1980, Tzvelev 1976). The last author recognized subsp. jordalii (A.E. Porsild)
Hultén, now considered a synonym of P. abbreviata subsp. pattersonii (Vasey)
A. and D. Löve and Kapoor, by Soreng (1991), but this taxon has not been found
on the Canadian arctic islands where all specimens belong to subsp. abbreviata
(Soreng 1991). (385) Consistently accepted as a distinct species (Tzvelev
1976, Edmonson 1980). (431) Code used for graphics files: popoab.


Poa alpina <L.>

      (1) Alpine blue grass. (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Sp. Pl. 67. 1753.
(5) Poa pratensis L. var. alpina(L.) Huds. Fl. Anglica, ed. 2. 39. 1778. Type:
Lapland. (7) Poa alpina var. minor Scribn. ex Beal, Grasses N. Amer. 2: 543.
1896: not Koch, 1837. Type: USA. Montana: Little Belt Mts., 12 Aug. 1883,
Scribner 388. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11)
Plants 10-40 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (21)
Plants without easily seen horizontal stems <base of tillers enclosed by thick
mats of accumulated leaf sheaths that persist more than a year; branching of
innovations strictly intravaginal>. (29) Prophylls 10-30 mm long. (30)
Prophylls with scabrous veins <minute trichomes>. (31) Prophylls with
pronounced keels <as pronounced as in a 2-keeled palea>. (32) Stems erect.
(35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm
nodes becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths
abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only
in the lower part <lower 1/4>. (73) Sheaths glabrous <or with extremely minute
trichomes visible at 40 ×>. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 1-3.7 mm long
<basal leaves 1-2(-3) mm; cauline leaves 2-4(-5) mm long>. (77) Ligules
membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules <variable>. (80) Ligules
apices obtuse <cauline leaves>, or truncate <basal leaves>. (81) Ligules
entire, or lacerate <cauline leaves>. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves
mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 1-5.6(-10) cm long <appearing
relatively short. The culm leaves 1 or rarely 2 on the lowerhalf of the culm,
leaving most of the culm leafless>. (90) Leaves 0.5-1.6 mm wide <when folded,
to 4.5 mm when flat>. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107)
Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous, or
scabrous <scaberulous on midvein>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120)
Leaf blades midvein conspicuously larger than the lateral veins. (121) Leaf
blades bulliform cells in distinct rows on either side of the midvein. (126)
Leaf blades flat, or folded. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154)
Inflorescence <pyramidal, sometimes ovoid, rather compact>. (155)
Inflorescence dense, or diffuse. (160) Inflorescence 2-6 cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 10-60 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous <usually>,
or scabrous <sparsely scaberulous>. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at
lowest node 2 <usually, the lower branches pulvinate in larger specimens, and
tending to droop (reflexed) from the weight of the spikelets, illustrated in
database>. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with spreading secondary
branches <divaricate>. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 3-24 mm long.
(167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth, or scabrous <sparsely
scaberulous, terete>. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed
<strongly so>. (188) Spikelets ovate. (189) Spikelets 3.9-6.2 mm long. (190)
Spikelets 2.5-4 mm wide <broad, often subcordate, at anthesis>. (191) Florets
per spikelet 3-4. (211) Glumes often half as wide as long. (212) First glume
0.9-0.95 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.6-0.7 ×
spikelet length. (214) First glume 2.6-3.8 mm long. (215) First glume ovate.
(216) First glume glabrous, or with trichomes <scabrous on the midvein>. (217)
First glume veins (1-)3. (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume
apex acute. (220) Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221) Second
glume almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume
2.8-4.2(-4.6) mm long. (223) Second glume ovate. (224) Second glume glabrous,
or with trichomes <on keel>. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla
internode 0.6-1 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla not
pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost
floret. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma 3.4-4.2 mm long. (236)
Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled <slightly>. (239) Lemma surface dull.
(240) Lemma hairy. (241) Lemma with trichomes on intervein region and veins
<densely hairy on keel and marginal veins, sparsely hairy on surface between
the veins. Not webbed at base (Cronquist et al. 1977)>. (242) Lemma veins 5.
(243) Lemma apex acute. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex ciliate <on
margins and keel>. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250)
Palea 2.9-3.6 mm long. (251) Palea with hairy veins <hairs longer towards the
base of the palea>. (285) Anthers 1.5-2.3 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309)
Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1.8-2.2 mm
long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 32, 33, 39, and 42 <Bowden 1961>.
(373) Substrate type: halophytic. (374) Hummocks, or snow beds <usually on
snowbeds, often in calcareous soils.>. (380) An alpine and low Arctic taxon
that occurs only in the southern islands of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago.
(381) In the Low Arctic this species may indicate areas where the snow lies
late into the season or a mildly alkaline substrate. For example, it was
observed to be more common at Silliman’s Fossil Ridge, Frobisher Bay, 63°46'N,
68°59'W growing in calcareous clay, than at Iqaluit where soil taken from near
Arctic College had a field pH = 6.8. (384) This taxon is readily distinguished
from other Arctic Poa species, by its broad leaves and heavy inflorescences.
Tzvelev (1976) indicated that he considered a vegetatively proliferating Poa
that had been named Poa vivipara L. Willd. to be Poa alpina subsp. vivipara.
Vegetatively proliferating inflorescences of P. alpina have not been collected
on the Arctic Archipelago. (385) This taxon is readily distinguished from
other Arctic Poa species, by its broad leaves and heavy inflorescences. (431)
Code used for graphics files: popoal.


Poa arctica <R. Br.> subsp. arctica

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Chlor. Melvill. 30. 1823. (6) Type:
Canada. N.W.T.: Melville Island, Mr. J. Edwards on W.E. Parry’s first voyage,
1819-1820. (Holotype: BM! Isotype: LE, Tzvelev (1976)). (10) Plants less than
15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants (7.5-)10-30 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants forming loose clusters <new branches
arising extravaginally, occasionally intravaginally>. (21) Plants with short
horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes elongate. (24)
Rhizomes 1 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales striate. (29) Prophylls 0.5 mm long
<in extravaginal branches>. (32) Stems decumbent <usually, leafy for
approximately half their length>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming
exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted
into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part.
(73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules (1-)1.5-3.5(-4) mm
long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules
ovate-oblong to transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices obtuse, or truncate.
(81) Ligules entire, or erose, or lacerate. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83)
Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 2-31 cm long. (90)
Leaves 0.8-1.5 mm wide <to 2.5 mm when flat>. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical. (107)
Leaf blades adaxially hairy. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein conspicuously larger
than the lateral veins. (121) Leaf blades bulliform cells in distinct rows on
either side of the midvein. (126) Leaf blades flat, or folded. (151)
Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence <pyramidal, rather open,
spikelets characteristically congregated towards the ends of the branches,
borne at right angles to the rachis, illustrated in database>. (155)
Inflorescence diffuse. (160) Inflorescence 2-9.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence
10-40(-75) mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous, or scabrous
<sometimes, near apex>. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node
2-5. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches.
(166) Inflorescence primary branches (4-)6-20(-26) mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches smooth, or scabrous <sparsely so>. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187)
Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets ovate. (189) Spikelets 4.4-6.6
mm long. (190) Spikelets 2.5-4 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet
(2-)3-4(-6). (211) Glumes unequal, the second almost twice as wide as the
first, weakly keeled. (212) First glume 0.7-0.9(-1) × the length of the second
glume <equal to subequal in length, unequal in width>. (213) First glume
0.6-0.8 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 3-5 mm long. (215) First glume
lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1-3. (218)
First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acute. (220) Second glume
0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long as, or
longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 3.5-5 mm long. (223) Second
glume lanceolate, or ovate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume
veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 1 mm long <approximately>. (228) Rachilla
internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230)
Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated
<web either a small tuft of curly hairs or well developed>. (234) Callus hairs
shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma (3.3-)3.8-5.2 mm long. (236) Lemma ovate.
(237) Lemma keeled. (239) Lemma surface dull <margins thinner in texture than
the body of the lemma>. (240) Lemma hairy. (241) Lemma with trichomes on
intervein region and veins <particularly on keel an marginal vein, but mostly
with appressed short hairs between the veins, lanate at the base>. (242) Lemma
veins 5 <not reaching to the apex>. (243) Lemma apex acute. (244) Lemma apex
entire. (245) Lemma apex ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea
well-developed. (250) Palea 3.5-4.5 mm long. (251) Palea with hairy veins <the
hairs particularly long towards the middle, and pilose between the veins
especially in the lower 1/2, a key distinction between P. arctica and P.
pratensis s.l.>. (285) Anthers 1.2-2.5 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309)
Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 2-2.5 mm long.
(331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 38, 56, 72, and 76 <<Edmonson (1980), in
Flora Europaea>>. (374) Moist areas, or hummocks <occurring on moderately to
imperfectly drained gravels, on soils adjacent to wetlands, and on raised
mossy hummocks in wetlands. It is often an early colonizer of disturbed
habitats.>. (380) A circumpolar and wide ranging species. (381) Plant height
is very variable in this species. When the previous season’s straw is
associated with the present season’s growth the length of the culms in the
straw often reflects the warmth of the previous growing season. This species
responds well to additional nutrients in the environment. In habitats
disturbed by human activity it is often a secondary grass colonizer after
species such as Festuca brachyphylla, Phippsia, and Trisetum spicatum. (384) A
widespread, relatively distinct species, Poa arctica is considered highly
polymorphic (Tzvelev 1976; Edmonson 1980). Tzvelev (1976) claimed that it is
probably represented in the former Soviet Union by several, still unidentified
subspecies with different chromosome numbers (see also Taxonomic Notes for P.
arctica subsp. caespitans). (385) A widespread, and relatively distinct
species. (428) This is the name used in Porsild (1964). (431) Code used for
graphics files: popoar.


Poa arctica <R. Br.> subsp. caespitans <Nannf.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Nannf. Symb. Bot. Uppsala 4: 71. 1940.
(5) Poa arctica var. caespitans (Nannf.) Hylander, Uppsala Univ. Arssks. 7:
78. 1945. (6) Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Ellesmere Island, “Harbour Fjord” Simmons
4000 in Herb. Uppsala (UPS), listed p. 77. CAN has H. G. Simmons collections
from Ellesmere Island, no. 303 from Cape Rutherford, 78°49'N, 49°W, and no.
3641 from “Goose Fiord”. (7) Poa tolmatchewii Roshev., Bull. Jard. Bot. Acad.
U.S.S.R. 30: 299. 1932. Type: Former Soviet Union: “Eastern Taimyr, lower
reaches of Yamu-Taimyr, lower part of the slope near Yamu-Tarida bank, 13 IX
1928”, A. Tolmachev 834. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm
high. (11) Plants 13-33 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
tufted <in tight coarse clumps, new shoots both intra-and extra-vaginal>. (21)
Plants with short horizontal stems, or without easily seen horizontal stems.
(22) Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes compacted <if present>. (24) Rhizomes
0.5-0.6 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales grooved <from prominent veins>. (26)
Rhizome scales 0.5-2 mm long. (27) Rhizome scales glabrous. (29) Prophylls 0.5
mm long <innovations mainly extravaginal?>. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous <only two internodes
elongated and the uppermost by far the longest>. (37) Culm nodes becoming
exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted
into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part.
(73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.5-1.5 mm long
<Nannfeldt’s 1940 description claims up to 3 mm long, blunt and irregularly
lacerate>. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules
ovate-oblong, or transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices acute, or obtuse.
(81) Ligules entire. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84)
Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 0.5-1.5 cm long <dull dark green or purple>.
(90) Leaves 0.5-0.8 mm wide <when folded; 0.8-1.4 mm when flat>. (92) Leaf
blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to
the stem <the flag leaf tapering from a broad base towards a hooked, scabrous
tip>. (107) Leaf blades adaxially hairy <sometimes puberulent>. (112) Leaf
blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120)
Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (121) Leaf
blades bulliform cells in distinct rows on either side of the midvein <only
conspicuous in wider, flat leaves>. (126) Leaf blades flat <rarely>, or folded
<usually>. (144) Flag leaf sheaths not inflated. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence ovate <pyramidal, with 1-3 spikelets towards
the ends of the branches>. (155) Inflorescence diffuse. (160) Inflorescence
3-6.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 30-40 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main
axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 1-3(-5).
(165) Inflorescence primary branches with spreading secondary branches. (166)
Inflorescence primary branches 7-20 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary
branches smooth, or scabrous. (185) Spikelets pedicellate <vegetatively
proliferating>. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187)
Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets obovate. (189) Spikelets
5.7-6.7 mm long. (190) Spikelets 2-4 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 2-4.
(212) First glume 0.8-0.85 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume
0.5-0.55 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 2.8-4 mm long. (215) First glume
lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 3. (218) First
glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acute. (220) Second glume
0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long as, or
longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 3.6-4.5(-4.9) mm long.
(223) Second glume oblanceolate <conspicuously wider than the first glume>.
(224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla
internode 1-1.3 mm long <0.6-0.7 mm, Nannfeldt (1940)>. (228) Rachilla
internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230)
Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated
<as a web reduced to a small tuft of curly hairs>. (233) Callus hairs 1.5-2 mm
long. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 3.7-4.7(-5.3) mm
long. (236) Lemma oblanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled. (239) Lemma surface dull
<often blackish purple, except for a narrow margin and the tip that is hyaline
with a golden-bronze coloured, lacerate zone below the apex>. (240) Lemma
hairy. (241) Lemma with trichomes on intervein region and veins <the proximal
5/8ths of the keel and the basal part of the marginal veins to about 2/5ths of
the length of the lemma are covered by appressed shiny, rather short (about
0.6 mm long) silky hairs; and in between, similar, but very short hairs; the
apical part of the lemma is glabrous. The hairs develop slowly and do not
reach their definite shape and size until anthesis, before which the spikelets
may look glabrous, for the keel and basal parts where the hairs develop first,
are then hidden by the glumes>. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex acute.
(244) Lemma apex erose. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex
awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 3.5-4 mm long. (251) Palea
with hairy veins. (285) Anthers 1.6-2 mm long <when fully developed; often
infertile anthers 1-1.3 mm present>. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2.
(317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n =
56 <Tzvelev 1976, Russian plants>. (374) Wet meadows, or moist areas, or
hummocks <found in a diversity of habitats such as hummocks in stream beds,
near owl perches, and on colluvial slopes. Shorter plants 10-15 cm tall grow
in dry silty gravels, or peat; plants 25-35 cm tall occur in sheltered, moist,
organically rich, silty sands, or marshy ground.>. (380) North America,
Greenland, Spitsbergen, Norway, Eastern Siberia. (381) The phenomenon of
vegetative proliferation in grasses has been observed to be a response of
plants to environmental stresses such as over watering or over fertilizing in
greenhouse conditions. The first author observed proliferating inflorescences
in plants growing adjacent to others with non-proliferating inflorescences
after a 4 day snow storm on Melville Island (in 1985). She observed the same
phenomenon at a North Yukon Dew-Line site where the plants with proliferating
inflorescences were predominantly growing in the oily tracks left by a heavy
vehicle crossing the tundra, while the plants with non-proliferating
inflorescences were growing in adjacent less disturbed ground. Had disturbance
or pollution in the environment triggered the inflorescences to proliferate?
When further collections of this taxon are made in the High Arctic, very
thorough habitat notes would be relevant. (384) While Nannfeldt (1940) claimed
that he had not seen fertile anthers in this taxon, and Porsild (1964) noted
that the anthers never contain good pollen, inflorescences on herbarium sheets
annotated by R.J. Soreng in 1990, housed at CAN, have fully developed, but not
necessarily fertile, anthers. Specimens of the Canadian Arctic complex that
have been called subsp. caespitans are densely tufted, only occasionally
rhizomatous, with flat, soft leaves. Porsild (1964) provided distribution maps
of both Poa arctica subsp. caespitans and Poa arctica var. vivipara Hook., but
did not indicate how he distinguished them. Löve and Löve (1975) followed
Roshevitz (1932) and list the taxon as having 2n = 56, on 12 counts, which
contrasts with 2n = 60-88 that they give for P. arctica s.s. The name has been
put into synonomy under P. tolmatchewii Roshevitz by Tzvelev (1976), following
Roshevitz (1932) who suggested that the taxon may be a hybrid P. arctica ×
glauca. Tzvelev (1976) commented that the rarely found viviparous variety,
var. vivipara Hook., is probably the hybrid between P. arctica × pratensis
s.l., which is not always distinguishable from some forms of P. pratensis
subsp. colpodea. R.J. Soreng, Cornell University, in annotating specimens at
CAN in 1990, recognized P. arctica and P. arctica subsp. caespitansNannf. In
1995, he explained that subsp. caespitans is not a well defined taxon. It may
not be diagnosable using the characters scabrous branches and more open
sheaths, but it appears intermediate between P. arctica and other species, may
represent hybrids, and backcrosses. (385) Mentioned by Porsild (1964) under
species comments on P. arctica along with comments on P. arctica var. vivipara
Hook., as a well-marked eastern arctic taxon. Tzvelev (1976), following
Roshevitz (1932), suggested that this may be a hybrid between P. arctica × P.
glauca. This taxon is part of DNA studies by L.J. Gillespie (CAN), 1994-1996.
(431) Code used for graphics files: poarca.


Poa glauca <M. Vahl>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Fl. Dan. t. 964: 3. 1790. (6) Type:
“Described from the northern part of Norway (Finmarken)” (probable Isotype:
“Poa glauca hab. in Finmarca, Hort. Berol. Herb. Kunth. LE,” Tzvelev, 1976).
(7) Poa glauca var. tenuior Simmons, Vasc. Pl. Fl. Ellesmereland. 162. 1906.
Three syntypes cited by Simmons, p. 164. “Var. tenuior South coast: Fram Fjord
(1926), Goose Fjord at Midday Knoll (3504 3644)”. (10) Plants less than 15 cm
high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 7.5-30 cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <branches arising extravaginally>. (29)
Prophylls 3-8 mm long. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins. (31) Prophylls with
pronounced keels <weakly>, or lacking pronounced keels. (32) Stems erect
<usually stiff and glaucous>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section.
(36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed. (39) Culm nodes not rooting
at the lower nodes. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72)
Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part <1/10-1/4>. (73) Sheaths
glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 1-2 mm long. (77) Ligules
membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous <apex puberulent>. (79) Ligules
ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules apices acute to obtuse <broadly>. (81) Ligules
entire, or erose, or lacerate. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly
basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 20-55 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-1 mm
wide <folded width>. (92) Leaf blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107)
Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous
<often glaucous>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein conspicuously larger than the lateral veins. (121) Leaf blades
bulliform cells in distinct rows on either side of the midvein. (126) Leaf
blades flat, or folded. (151) Inflorescence paniculate <usually, sometimes
very narrow and reduced to a raceme in dwarfed arctic plants less than 10 cm
tall, branches erect, illustrated in the image library>. (154) Inflorescence
linear. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 1-6 cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 2-16 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis scabrous. (164)
Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 2. (165) Inflorescence primary
branches with appressed secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary
branches 3-14 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches scabrous <on the
angles, rarely nearly smooth>. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188)
Spikelets ovate. (189) Spikelets 3.7-6 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.2-5.6 mm
wide. (191) Florets per spikelet (2-)3. (212) First glume 0.83-0.96 × the
length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.48-0.75 × spikelet length.
(214) First glume 2.7-3.3 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First
glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins (2-)3. (218) First glume margins
glabrous. (219) First glume apex acute. (220) Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long
as the spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long as, or longer than, the
lowest floret. (222) Second glume 2.8-4 mm long. (223) Second glume
lanceolate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226)
Rachilla internode 0.8-1.2 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229)
Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond
the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated <as a tuft, with several
curly hairs 0.2-0.5 mm long>. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the floret.
(235) Lemma 2.9-4 mm long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled
<slightly>. (239) Lemma surface dull <margins thinner than the body of the
lemma>. (240) Lemma hairy. (241) Lemma with trichomes on veins only <base
characteristically with hairs on the keel and marginal veins, frequently with
a few short hairs on the intermediate veins and sometimes between them near
the base>. (242) Lemma veins 5 <sometimes 4, lateral veins not extending to
the apex>. (243) Lemma apex acute. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex
ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea
2.7-3.4 mm long. (251) Palea with hairy veins. (285) Anthers 1.2-1.5 mm long.
(296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis.
(327) Fruit 1.6-2 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 42, 50, 56, 64,
65, 70, 75, and 78 <Bowden (1961): 42-78 Löve and Löve (1975)>. (373)
Substrate type: acidic, or calcareous. (374) Sand <an ubiquitous pioneer
species that forms large firm tussocks on well-drained, sandy or gravelly
terrain, flood plains and beaches. It is common on weakly acidic and local on
weakly alkaline soils. The lushest growth forms occur around refuse dumps,
animal burrows and disturbed building sites. Very stunted plants about 10 cm
tall, with the inflorescence reduced and spike-like, occur in the colder
sectors of the Queen Elizabeth Islands.>. (381) An early colonizing species of
disturbed environments with sandy or gravel substrates, that are weakly acidic
or alkaline. This species forms dense tussocks in the Low Arctic and provides
excellent cover for the establishment of arctic willows that gradually replace
the grass in stabilizing the environment in the transition to a climax, Low
Arctic tundra similar to the cover before the disturbance. Observations made
in the transplant garden of Burt and Joanne Rose, Iqaluit, 1986-1994. (384) A
very widespread species that looks rather different in cold sectors of the
Arctic, as stunted plants 10-15 cm high. Caryopses are rarely formed in high
arctic plants, because of the short growing season. (385) A very widespread
species that looks rather different in cold sectors of the Arctic, as stunted
plants 10-15 cm high. (428) This is the name used in Porsild (1964). (431)
Code used for graphics files: popogl.


Poa hartzii <Gand.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. 66: 302. 1919. (6)
Type: Greenland: “Ad Kordlunguak Vajgatsch, leg. Hartz.” (Tzvelev 1976). (7)
Poa hartzii var. vivipara Polunin, Bull. Natl. Mus. Canada 92 (Biol. Ser. 24):
70. 1940. Poa glauca Vahl. var. atrovioloacea Lange f. prolifera Simmons,
Vasc. Pl. Fl. Ellesmereland. 163. 1906. P. hartzii f. prolifera (Simmons)
Boivin. Syntypes: Canada. N.W.T.: Ellesmere Island, Goose Fjord, at the Yellow
Hill Simmons 3587, and Midday Knoll 3500, 3643 (GH!). (10) Plants less than 15
cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 10-33 cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <shoots extravaginal and intravaginal>.
(21) Plants without easily seen horizontal stems <or rarely appearing somewhat
rhizomatous in very loose soil>. (29) Prophylls 5-10 mm long. (30) Prophylls
with smooth veins. (31) Prophylls with pronounced keels, or lacking pronounced
keels. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36)
Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed <usually>, or becoming exposed
<rarely>. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted
into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part.
(73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules (1.8-)2.4-4(-5) mm
long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules lanceolate,
or ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules apices acuminate, or acute <narrowly>. (81)
Ligules entire, or erose. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal.
(84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 2-13 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-1.2 mm wide
<folded width>. (91) Leaf blades without auricles. (92) Leaf blades folded in
bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or
spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf
blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120)
Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (121) Leaf
blades bulliform cells in distinct rows on either side of the midvein. (126)
Leaf blades flat <rarely>, or folded. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154)
Inflorescence linear, or lanceolate. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160)
Inflorescence 2.5-6 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-20 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous <sometimes scabrous>. (164) Number of
inflorescence branches at lowest node 2 <usually>. (165) Inflorescence primary
branches with appressed secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary
branches 6.5-12 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth, or
scabrous <sparsely so>. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188)
Spikelets ovate. (189) Spikelets 4.8-7.4 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.7-3.3 mm
wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 3-4(-6). (212) First glume 0.76-0.97 × the
length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.4-0.66 × spikelet length.
(214) First glume 2-4 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume
glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1(-2). (218) First glume margins glabrous.
(219) First glume apex acute. (220) Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the
spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest
floret <or barely as long>. (222) Second glume 2.2-4.2 mm long. (223) Second
glume lanceolate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3.
(226) Rachilla internode 0.9-1.2 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous.
(229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending
beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated <villous crown around
the callus>. (233) Callus hairs (0.5-)0.8-2 mm long. (234) Callus hairs
shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma (3.3-)3.9-5 mm long. (236) Lemma ovate.
(237) Lemma keeled <weakly>, or rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface dull
<apical margins thinner than the body of the lemma>. (240) Lemma hairy. (241)
Lemma with trichomes on intervein region and veins <base sparsely lanate,
hairy on and between the veins in the lower half, with longer hairs towards
the base>. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex acute. (244) Lemma apex
entire. (245) Lemma apex ciliate <on margins and midvein>. (246) Lemma apex
awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 2.3-4 mm long. (251) Palea
with hairy veins. (285) Anthers 0.6-2 mm long <often transparent or shrunken;
no caryopses have been found, but healthy ovaries are formed>. (296) Ovary
superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (360) 2n = 63-70 <Tzvelev 1976; no Canadian counts>. (373)
Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Clay, or sand <found on alluvial clay, dry,
sandy gravel, on hillsides or floodplains and around animal burrows. It is
apparently limited to calcareous soils.>. (381) An earlier colonizer of High
Arctic calcareous sandy or gravelly substrates. Plants grow usually as
isolated tussocks sometimes in association with Poa abbreviata and Puccinellia
angustata. (384) Possibly P. abbreviata × P. glauca. Cayouette (1984) recorded
a collection of P. hartzii from northern Quebec and summarized the debate
concerning this taxon, pointing out that Sorensen (1953), Holmen (1957), and
Porsild (1964) considered it a species. According to Sorensen (1933) “Even if
Poa Hartzii is thus intermediate in many respects between P. abbreviata and P.
glauca, it hardly represents the hybrid between these two species”. Jorgensen
et al. (1958) noted that individuals of P. hartzii in Greenland showed meiotic
irregularities and formed abnormal pollen but developed good seeds that lead
them to conclude that the taxon was apomictic. Scholander (1934) observed P.
hartzii to be intermediate between P. abbreviata and P. glauca, whereas
Nannfeldt (1935) suggested that it may be the hybrid P. arctica × P. glauca.
Edmonson (1980) treated it as a stablized, but apparently sterile, hybrid of
P. abbreviata × P. glauca. Soreng (1991) discusses P. hartzii as a species
that possibly had a hybrid origin. The character “branches scabrid” given by
Edmonson (1980) is not always evident on specimens from the High Arctic. The
anthers found in Canadian material from the High Arctic and the lack of seed
formation, which may only be a factor of climate, encouraged McLachlan et al.
(1989) to follow authors who have suggested this is a hybrid taxon. On
Ellesmere Island at Eureka and Tanquary Fiord there are areas where numerous,
isolated clumps of Poa hartzii grow, associated with Poa abbreviata and
Puccinellia angustata. There is no indication that the Poa hartzii plants have
spread vegetatively in the areas where they have been observed. L.J. Gillespie
(CAN) is currently studying the taxon using DNA techniques. (385) Nannfeldt
(1935), Sorensen (1953), Holmen (1957), Jorgensen et al. (1958), Cayouette
(1984), have discussed the status of this taxon. Edmonson (1980) in Flora
Europaea treated it as a stabilized but apparently sterile hybrid P.
abbreviata × P. glauca. Whether hybrids between P. glauca and either P.
abbreviata or P. arctica are being treated under the single name ×P. hartzii
is one of the ideas being tested in a DNA study by L.J. Gillespie (CAN)
1994-1996. (428) Be aware of drawing on CAN 36445. (431) Code used for
graphics files: popoha.


Poa pratensis <L.> subsp. alpigena <(Fr. ex Blytt) Hiitonen>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Suom. Kasvio: 205. 1933. (5) Poa
pratensis var. alpigena Fr. ex Blytt, Norg. Fl. 1: 130. 1861. Poa alpigena
(Fr. ex Blytt) Lindman, Svensk Fanerogamfl. 91. 1918. (6) Type: Described from
Spitzbergen, “Liefdebay”. (7) Poa stricta subsp. colpodea Th. Fr., Ofvers
Forh. Kongl. Svenska Vetensk. Akad. 26: 138. 1869. Poa alpigena var. colpodea
(Th. Fr.) Schol., Skr. Svalbard Ishavet, 62: 89. 1934. Poa rigens subsp.
colpodea (Th. Fr.) D. Löve, Taxon 17: 89. 1968. Poa pratensis subsp. colpodea
(Th. Fr.) Tzvelev, Novosti Sist. Vyssh. Rast. 9: 47. 1972. Poa alpigena subsp.
colpodea (Th. Fr.) Tzvelev, Novosti Sist. Vyssh. Rast. 9: 47. 1972. Poa
pratensis L. subsp. alpigena (Fr. ex Blytt) Hiitonen var. colpodea (Th. Fr.)
Soreng, Phytologia 71: 403-404. 1991. ? Poa pratensis f. prolifera Simmons,
Vasc. Pl. Fl. Ellesmereland 169. 1906. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or
more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants (20-)30-60(-65) cm high <leafy for more than
three quarters of the plant height>. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (21) Plants
with conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous <forming turf in suitable habitats in the Low Arctic, often
only a single culm per season in harsh environments. Shoots mainly arising
extravaginally>. (29) Prophylls 0.5 mm long <in extravaginal branches>. (32)
Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems
glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed <in short plants>, or becoming exposed.
(38) Culm nodes number visible 0-2. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part <1/4-1/2>.
(73) Sheaths glabrous, or with trichomes. (74) Sheaths scabrous <minutely so,
when present>. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.9-3.1 mm long <lower
leaves 0.9-2.2 mm; upper leaves 2.0-3.0 mm>. (77) Ligules membranous. (78)
Ligules glabrous, or hairy <abaxially puberulent>. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong.
(80) Ligules apices obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83)
Leaves mostly basal, or distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate.
(89) Leaves 3-17 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.4-1.8 mm wide <when folded>. (92) Leaf
blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to
the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially
glabrous, or scabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous <usually>.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size
to other veins in the leaf. (121) Leaf blades bulliform cells in distinct rows
on either side of the midvein. (126) Leaf blades flat <usually>, or folded.
(151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence lanceolate, or not
applicable <pyramidal>. (155) Inflorescence dense, or diffuse <at anthesis>.
(160) Inflorescence 3-12.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 10-70 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at
lowest node (1-)2-5. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with spreading
secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 17-50 mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches smooth <or nearly so, with spikelets evenly
distributed along the branches>. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188)
Spikelets ovate. (189) Spikelets 4-5.2 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.4-2.5 mm
wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 2-3. (211) Glumes distinctly keeled, the
keels scabrous above. (212) First glume 0.7-0.85 × the length of the second
glume. (213) First glume 0.45-0.55 × spikelet length. (214) First glume
1.9-2.8 mm long. (215) First glume ovate. (216) First glume glabrous, or with
trichomes <with 3 to 4 minute prickles on the midvein>. (217) First glume
veins 1. (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acute.
(220) Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221) Second glume
almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret <or barely as long>.
(222) Second glume 2.6-3.3 mm long. (223) Second glume ovate. (224) Second
glume glabrous, or with trichomes <scaberulous>. (225) Second glume veins 3.
(226) Rachilla internode 1.3-1.8 mm long <approximately>. (228) Rachilla
internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230)
Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated
<as a thick web slightly separated from the tuft of hairs of the lanate base
of lemma>. (233) Callus hairs <curly>. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the
floret. (235) Lemma 3-4 mm long. (236) Lemma lanceolate <broadly>. (237) Lemma
keeled <slightly, the base sparsely lanate, the margins and keel with long
hairs, but elsewhere almost glabrous>. (239) Lemma surface dull <margins
thinner than the body of the lemma>. (240) Lemma hairy. (241) Lemma with
trichomes on veins only <mainly on marginal veins and keel, and often on the
intermediate veins>. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex rounded. (244)
Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249)
Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 2.7-3.4 mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous
veins to with hairy veins. (285) Anthers 1.4-1.8 mm long. (296) Ovary
superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit
1.8-2.4 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 35, 43, 56, 70, 71, 72,
and 84 <<Flora Europaea> Löve and Löve (1975) found chromosome numbers between
2n = 28 and 127 occurred, although the most frequent numbers were 56-84.
Euploid numbers were more frequent than aneuploid. No differences in vitality
between plants with euploid and aneuploid numbers were observable>. (374)
Moist areas <occurring on moist to well-drained, often disturbed sites, such
as creek flood plains, on damp silt, marshy depressions among polygons, or
plateaus of clay and silt. The species is also found on gravel ridges along
beaches, on damp sand near the sea shore, and also downslope from bird
perches. Porsild (1957, 1964) considered the taxon occasional to common in
sandy tundra and in meadows by streams and by lake shores where it often forms
a firm mat. He stated it is strongly nitrophilous and greatly favoured by
refuse and manure near human habitation or below bird cliffs and nesting
sites. Between 1986 and 1994 plants of this taxon were observed growing on
disturbed sites around buildings near the Science Institute of the Northwest
Territories, in Iqaluit, and occupying a large area around the abandoned
Hudson Bay post at McCormick Inlet, Frobisher Bay.>. (381) Often indicative of
habitat re-stabilization after a major human disturbance such as bulldozing to
level ground for roads and houses. For example, at the site of the former
Hudson Bay Post in McCormick Inlet, Frobisher Bay, the area where the
buildings were, was a dense, almost mono-culture turf of this species in 1989.
Smaller areas of this species are found in Iqaluit, on land around buildings
more than 10 years old, for example, land behind the town hall in Iqaluit in
1994. This species is very similar to Kentucky blue grass, Poa pratensis, that
is sometimes seeded to try and establish lawns around Arctic townsites. While
the introduced grass may flourish for 2 - 3 years, it becomes weaker with time
and is gradually replaced by native species that seed in, or by Festuca rubra
if it was present in the seed mix. (384) Porsild (1955) claimed that Canadian
specimens agreed well with specimens from northeast Greenland and also with
the excellent description and illustrations given by Scholander (1934). The
taxon is distinct and relatively common in the Canadian High Arctic. We have
retained the name used in Porsild (1964), but further work is needed to
determine whether it should continue to be known by this name or recognized as
a subspecies of Poa pratensis L. It was treated as a full species in Porsild
(1955) and Edmonson (1980); treated as Poa pratensis subsp. alpigena (Fr. ex
Blytt) Hiitonen (Tzvelev 1976). This is one of the taxa being considered in a
DNA study by L.J. Gillespie (CAN) 1994-1996. Vegetative proliferation occurs
in the inflorescences of this species when plants are growing in moss on owl
perches. Plants with such inflorescences are referred to var. colpodea (Th.
Fr.) Schol. (385) Poa alpigena Fr. ex Blytt. Considered a highly polymorphic
subspecies composed of two varieties: var. alpigena Fr. ex Blytt, and var.
colpodea (Th. Fr.) Soreng (Soreng 1991). One of the taxa being considered in a
DNA study by L.J. Gillespie (CAN) 1994-1996. (428) Data from large Poa
pratensis-like specimens from the N.W.T. (431) Code used for graphics files:
popopr.


Puccinellia <Parl.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more
than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 1-15-30 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants tufted, or matted, or forming loose clusters. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems, or without easily seen horizontal stems.
(22) Plants stoloniferous. (29) Prophylls 4-12-30 mm long. (30) Prophylls with
smooth veins, or with scabrous veins. (31) Prophylls with pronounced keels, or
lacking pronounced keels. (32) Stems erect, or decumbent. (35) Stems circular
or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or
becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-2. (39) Culm nodes rooting
at the lower nodes, or not rooting at the lower nodes. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the
lower part, or with the margins not fused. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules
present. (76) Ligules 0.3-1.6-4 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules
glabrous, or hairy <rarely>. (79) Ligules lanceolate, or ovate-oblong. (80)
Ligules apices acute, or obtuse. (81) Ligules entire, or erose, or lacerate.
(82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems, or mostly
basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (85) Leaves not distinctly distichous. (89)
Leaves 1-4.8-16 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.2-1.1-4 mm wide. (91) Leaf blades
without auricles. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud <usually>, or folded in bud
<Puccinellia vahliana>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to
the stem, or spreading from the vertical, or reflexed. (107) Leaf blades
adaxially glabrous, or scabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous,
or scabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein
conspicuously larger than the lateral veins, or midvein similar in size to
other veins in the leaf. (121) Leaf blades bulliform cells in distinct rows on
either side of the midvein <Puccinellia vahliana>, or without bulliform cells
in a distinct row on either side of the midvein <usually>. (126) Leaf blades
flat, or folded, or involute. (144) Flag leaf sheaths not inflated. (151)
Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence linear, or oblong, or
lanceolate, or ovate. (155) Inflorescence diffuse. (160) Inflorescence
0.35-4.5-13 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 2-20-130 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence
main axis glabrous, or scabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at
lowest node 1-7. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary
branches, or with spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary
branches 1-20-70 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth, or
scabrous. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above
the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate.
(189) Spikelets 3-6-9.5 mm long. (190) Spikelets 0.7-2.2-4.5 mm wide. (191)
Florets per spikelet 2-7. (212) First glume 0.45-0.65-0.9 × the length of the
second glume. (213) First glume 0.1-0.27-0.6 × spikelet length. (214) First
glume 0.7-1.7-3 mm long. (215) First glume oblong, or lanceolate, or ovate, or
oblanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1-3. (218)
First glume margins glabrous, or ciliate. (219) First glume apex acuminate, or
acute, or obtuse. (220) Second glume 0.4 × as long as the spikelet or less, or
0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet <in Puccinellia vahliana>. (221) Second
glume shorter than the lowest floret, or almost as long as, or longer than,
the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 1.3-2.3-3.9 mm long. (223) Second glume
oblong, or lanceolate, or ovate, or elliptic, or oblanceolate. (224) Second
glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3-5. (226) Rachilla internode
0.1-0.9-1.5 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous, or hairy. (229)
Rachilla pronounced between the florets, or not pronounced between the
florets. (230) Rachilla terminating in a vestigial floret, or extending beyond
the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated, or not differentiated.
(232) Callus hairy. (233) Callus hairs 0.05-0.08-0.6 mm long. (234) Callus
hairs shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 2.1-3-4.5 mm long. (236) Lemma
oblong, or ovate, or lanceolate, or elliptic, or obovate. (237) Lemma keeled,
or rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface shiny, or dull. (240) Lemma
glabrous, or sparsely scaberulous, or hairy. (242) Lemma veins 3-7 <the
midvein reaching to the apex, the other veins not reaching the apex>. (243)
Lemma apex caudate, or acuminate, or acute, or rounded. (244) Lemma apex
entire, or erose, or lacerate. (245) Lemma apex ciliate, or not ciliate. (246)
Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 1.9-3-4.6 mm long.
(251) Palea with glabrous veins, or with scabrous veins, or with hairy veins.
(285) Anthers 0.6-1.3-2.5 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317)
Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1-1.8-2.6 mm long. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (360) 2n = 14, or 21, or 28, or 42, or 56. (373) Substrate type:
acidic, or halophytic. (384) Restricted generic description combining data for
the taxa occurring in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, using INTKEY. (385)
Restricted generic description combining data for the taxa occurring in the
Canadian Arctic Archipelago, using INTKEY. (425) Genus. (431) Code used for
graphics files: popu.


Puccinellia agrostidea <T.J. Sorensen>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Natl. Mus. Canada Bull. 135: 78. 1955.
(5) Phippsia agrostidea (T.J. Sorensen) A. Löve and D. Löve, Cytotax. Atlas
Arct. Fl. 63. 1975. (6) Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Banks Island, De Salis Bay on
the south coast; dry tundra flat, near lagoon on owl perch, July 31, 1949,
A.E. Porsild 17614. (CAN). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15
cm high. (11) Plants 10-20(-35) cm high <Sorensen suggested they become taller
than this after flowering, but we have been unable to confirm this>. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (29) Prophylls 10-12 mm long. (30)
Prophylls with smooth veins. (31) Prophylls lacking pronounced keels. (32)
Stems erect <the whole plant purplish tinged>. (35) Stems circular or oval in
cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed. (39) Culm
nodes not rooting at the lower nodes. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into
the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part. (73)
Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 1-2 mm long. (77) Ligules
membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules lanceolate, or ovate-oblong.
(80) Ligules apices acute. (81) Ligules erose, or lacerate. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems <flowering culms commonly
with 3 leaves>. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 1.5-6 cm long. (90) Leaves
0.2-0.4 mm wide <when rolled>, or 0.8-1.3 mm wide <when flat>. (92) Leaf
blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to
the stem. (107) Leaf blades adaxially scabrous <trichomes particularly on
blade margins>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in
the leaf. (121) Leaf blades without bulliform cells in a distinct row on
either side of the midvein. (126) Leaf blades involute. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence linear to ovate. (155) Inflorescence diffuse.
(160) Inflorescence 2-6 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 8-40 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at
lowest node 2-5. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary
branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 4-25 mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186)
Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally
compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate. (189) Spikelets (4-)6-7 mm long. (190)
Spikelets 2.5-4.5 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 3-5. (212) First glume
0.65-0.9 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.2-0.45 ×
spikelet length. (214) First glume 0.8-2(-2.8) mm long. (215) First glume
lanceolate <purple>. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1
<obscure>. (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acute.
(220) Second glume 0.4 × as long as the spikelet or less. (221) Second glume
shorter than the lowest floret, or almost as long as, or longer than, the
lowest floret. (222) Second glume 1.8-2.5(-3.2) mm long. (223) Second glume
ovate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla
internode 0.5-0.8 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla
not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the
uppermost floret. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma 2.3-3(-4.3) mm
long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled <sometimes appearing slightly
so>, or rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface shiny. (240) Lemma hairy.
(241) Lemma with trichomes on veins only <with sparse long hairs along veins
on lower fourth and sparse scabrous trichomes along veins on upper portion,
often with bronze coloured apical band>. (242) Lemma veins 5 <faint>. (243)
Lemma apex acute. (244) Lemma apex erose, or lacerate. (245) Lemma apex
ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea
2.8-2.9(-3.7) mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous veins <sparsely,
ciliate-spiculose>. (285) Anthers 1.2-1.5(-2.2) mm long. (296) Ovary superior.
(309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (373) Substrate type: halophytic. (374) Clay, or sand <or
gravelly soils, particularly in areas that are periodically flooded or salt
sprayed.>. (380) Endemic to the Western North American Arctic. (384) Sorensen
(1955) notes that: “Puccinellia agrostidea may show some superficial
resemblance to poorly developed P. borealis Swallen. However, it differs from
that species by the narrowly contracted, tiny panicle, the very thick and
glossy, entire lemmas, and the longer anthers. By these characters it
approaches P. grandis Swallen, to which it seems closely related, and differs
from that species chiefly by its smaller size. It may be regarded as an arctic
vicariad of the more southern P. grandis”. (385) Sorensen (1955) considered
that this taxon “shows some resemblance to poorly developed P. borealis
Swallen, and may be regarded as an arctic vicariad of the more southern P.
grandis”. (428) Porsild (1964). (431) Code used for graphics files: popuag.


Puccinellia andersonii <Swallen>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 340: 21. 1944. (5)
Phippsia anderssonii (Swallen) A. Löve and D. Löve, Cytotax, Atlas Arct. Fl.
63. 1975. (6) Type: United States. Alaska: Point Lay, in very wet soil, 5 Aug.
1938, J. P. Anderson 4399. (Holotype: NA; Isotype: CAN!). (10) Plants less
than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 7-30 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (29) Prophylls 10-15 mm long. (30)
Prophylls with smooth veins. (31) Prophylls lacking pronounced keels. (32)
Stems decumbent <geniculate>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section.
(36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed <usually>, or becoming
exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted
into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part.
(73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules (1-)1.3-1.7 mm long.
(77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong.
(80) Ligules apices obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83)
Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 3.5-10.5 cm long. (90)
Leaves 0.5-1 mm wide <when rolled>. (91) Leaf blades without auricles <ligules
decurrent>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf
blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf
blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to
other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat <rarely>, or involute. (144)
Flag leaf sheaths not inflated <the uppermost leaf sheath elongated and
somewhat inflated>. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence
lanceolate <to pyramidal, less than one quarter exserted from the uppermost
leaf sheath>. (155) Inflorescence dense, or diffuse. (160) Inflorescence
(1-)2-7(-8) cm long. (161) Inflorescence (5-)10-40 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at
lowest node 2 <usually>. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed
secondary branches, or with spreading secondary branches <without spikelets on
their lower half>. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 6-30 mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186)
Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally
compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate, or ovate. (189) Spikelets
(5-)7-9(-9.5) mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.5-2 mm wide <described as having an
“opaque, fatty lustre” Swallen, 1944>. (191) Florets per spikelet 4-5(-7).
(212) First glume 0.45-0.8 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume
0.15-0.25 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 1-2.3 mm long. (215) First
glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1. (218)
First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acute. (220) Second glume
0.4 × as long as the spikelet or less. (221) Second glume shorter than the
lowest floret. (222) Second glume 2-3 mm long. (223) Second glume ovate. (224)
Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode
1-1.3 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous, or hairy <very sparsely>.
(229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending
beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated <as very short
trichomes>, or not differentiated <absent on florets towards the top of the
spikelet>. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 3-4 mm
long. (236) Lemma ovate. (237) Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface
dull. (240) Lemma glabrous <mostly, but sometimes with a few sparse hairs
towards the base in the lower florets, often without such hairs on the upper
florets>. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex acute, or rounded. (244) Lemma
apex entire, or erose <entire according to Sorensen, 1953, but observed to be
erose in several Canadian specimens annotated by him>. (245) Lemma apex not
ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea
3-3.8 mm long. (251) Palea with glabrous veins, or with scabrous veins <a few
scabrous hairs near the tip>. (285) Anthers 0.8-1 mm long. (296) Ovary
superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit
1.8-2.2 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 56 <Holmen 1952>. (373)
Substrate type: halophytic. (374) Moist areas <occurring on coastal flats
behind boulder beaches, in sand, gravel, or clays. Sorensen (1953) claims that
it “seems to be absent from the Old World Arctic”.>. (380) Restricted to the
Arctic from Alaska to Greenland. (381) Indicative of the high tide line
reached by spring tides. (384) Swallen (1944) states that “This is a rather
distinct species and its relationship is not evident. The long decumbent base,
short, stiffly spreading panicle branches, and acute, more or less toothed,
lemmas are characteristic.” Sorensen (1953) described the lemma as entire, but
the lemmas were observed to be erose in several Canadian specimens annotated
by him. Sorensen (1953) comments that “Puccinellia andersonii, recently
described by Swallen (1944, p. 21) was previously known only from the type
locality, Pt. Lay, arctic Alaska. The present revision of the Greenland
Puccinellias has shown that it is distributed over northern Greenland
southward to about 70°N on the west coast and to about 73°N on the east coast.
Formerly it was usually mistaken for Puccinellia angustata, in some cases for
Colpodium vahlianum.... In spite of some habitual similarity, no direct
connection between P. andersonii and P. angustata seems to exist”. (385) A
relatively distinct taxon, that was discussed briefly by Sorensen (1953).
(428) Data based on T.J. Sorensen annotated specimens. This is the name used
in Porsild (1964). (431) Code used for graphics files: popuad.


Puccinellia angustata <(R. Br.) Rand and Redfield>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Fl. of Mount Desert Island, Maine, 181.
1894. Poa angustata R. Br., Chlor. Melvill. 29. 1823. (5) Glyceria angustata
(R. Br.) Fr. Nov. Fl. Suec. Mant. 3: 176. 1843. Phippsia angustata (R. Br.) A.
Löve and D. Löve, Cytotax. Atlas Arct. Fl. 63. 1975. (6) Type: Canada. N.W.T.:
Melville Island, 1819-1820, Mr. (J.) Edwards on W. E. Parry’s first voyage.
(Holotype: BM! Isotype: CAN!). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than
15 cm high. (11) Plants (6-)10-30 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants tufted. (29) Prophylls 4-12 mm long. (30) Prophylls with scabrous veins
<delicate trichomes scabrescent to glabrescent>. (31) Prophylls lacking
pronounced keels <but with prominent veins>. (32) Stems erect <or decumbent>.
(35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm
nodes not exposed <usually>, or becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes number
visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths
with the margins fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75)
Ligules present. (76) Ligules 1.4-3 mm long <to 4 mm, Sorensen, 1953>. (77)
Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules lanceolate. (80)
Ligules apices acute. (81) Ligules entire. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves
mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 14-160 cm long. (90) Leaves
0.5-1.2 mm wide <when rolled>. (91) Leaf blades without auricles <ligules
decurrent>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf
blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf
blades adaxially glabrous <observed to be nearly glabrous with a few scabrous
prickles, Sorensen, 1955>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to
other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat, or involute. (144) Flag leaf
sheaths not inflated <sheath longer than the blade>. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence lanceolate <erect>. (155) Inflorescence dense,
or diffuse. (160) Inflorescence 1.2-8.5(-10) cm long. (161) Inflorescence
4-9(-20) mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous, or scabrous
<sparsely>. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 2, or 3
<often one with a solitary spikelet>. (165) Inflorescence primary branches
with appressed secondary branches <usually>, or with spreading secondary
branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 2.5-26 mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches scabrous <sometimes sparsely so>. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187)
Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate. (189) Spikelets
4.1-8.2 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.1-2.9 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet
3-4(-6). (212) First glume 0.5-0.7 × the length of the second glume. (213)
First glume 0.25-0.4 × spikelet length. (214) First glume (1.2-)1.6-2.2 mm
long. (215) First glume lanceolate, or ovate. (216) First glume glabrous.
(217) First glume veins 1(-2). (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First
glume apex acute. (220) Second glume 0.4 × as long as the spikelet or less.
(221) Second glume shorter than the lowest floret, or almost as long as, or
longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 2.3-3.2 mm long. (223)
Second glume oblong, or elliptic. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second
glume veins 3 <2 of them indistinct>. (226) Rachilla internode 0.8-1.4 mm
long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between
the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231)
Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma 2.7-3.5(-4) mm long. (236) Lemma ovate,
or lanceolate. (237) Lemma rounded on the back <margins straight, thinner in
texture than the body of the lemma>. (238) Lemma lemma not strongly inrolled.
(239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma hairy. (241) Lemma with trichomes on
intervein region and veins <copiously pilose in their lower half of the veins,
interveins finely pilose at base>. (242) Lemma veins 4-5. (243) Lemma apex
acute, or rounded. (244) Lemma apex entire, or erose. (245) Lemma apex ciliate
to not ciliate <minutely>. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea
well-developed. (250) Palea 2.1-3.3 mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous veins.
(285) Anthers (0.6-)0.8-1.1 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2.
(317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1.6-2.4 mm long. (331)
Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 42 <Bowden 1961, 5 counts; Löve and Löve 1975,
12 counts>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous <weakly>. (374) Moist areas
<commonly growing in sparsely vegetated, weakly alkaline, fine grained
lacustrine, and flood plain deposits. Found in moist shallow depressions of
otherwise dry terrain, and on colluvium from eroding raised marine sediments,
in dry barrens.>. (380) Circumpolar, High Arctic. (381) As an early colonizer
this taxon is often indicative of instable or recently disturbed environments
such as land slides, clay deposits near the mouth of a river, or gravels in a
river flood plain. Larger plants may be indicative of additional nutrients
reaching the habitat from anthropogenic disturbances near buildings or animal
activities around owl perches or lemming burrows. (384) This is probably the
most commonly collected species on the Arctic Islands, certainly so in the CAN
records. Sorensen (1953) indicates that although variation within the taxon is
considerable, it does not justify recognition of more than one entity in P.
angustata. (385) Probably the most commonly collected species on the Arctic
Islands, certainly so in the CAN records. (428) Hairs on lemma dense to sparse
in T.J. Sorensen annotated specimens. This is the name used by Porsild (1964).
(431) Code used for graphics files: popuan.


Puccinellia arctica <(Hook.) Fernald and Weath.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Rhodora 18: 4. 1916. (5) Glyceria arctica
Hook. Fl. Bor. Amer. ii. 248, t. 229. 1840. (6) Type: “Arctic sea coast. Dr.
Richardson, s.n.” (Hooker, 1840). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more
than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 15-40 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants tufted. (29) Prophylls 10 mm long. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins.
(31) Prophylls lacking pronounced keels. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular
or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or
becoming exposed <rarely>. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths
abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only
in the lower part, or with the margins not fused. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75)
Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.8-2.1 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78)
Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong to transversely oblong. (80)
Ligules apices acute to obtuse. (81) Ligules entire, or erose, or lacerate
<sometimes appearing cleft>. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal
<but with several cauline leaves>. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 6-16 cm
long. (90) Leaves 0.4-0.6 mm wide <when rolled>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in
bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or
spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or
scabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in
the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat, or folded, or involute <some P. borealis
have flat or conduplicate leaves>. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154)
Inflorescence lanceolate to ovate. (155) Inflorescence diffuse. (160)
Inflorescence 4-10 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 7-30 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous to scabrous <scabrous towards top of
inflorescence>. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 2-4.
(165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches, or
with spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 20-40
mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth, or scabrous. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187)
Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets oblong. (189) Spikelets 3.9-6
mm long. (190) Spikelets 1-2.5 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet (2-)4-5.
(211) Glumes shiny with tiny teeth on margins. (212) First glume 0.53-0.74 ×
the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.18-0.38 × spikelet length.
(214) First glume 1.2-2 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate to ovate. (216)
First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1 <faint>. (218) First glume
margins glabrous, or ciliate. (219) First glume apex acute. (220) Second glume
0.4 × as long as the spikelet or less. (221) Second glume shorter than the
lowest floret. (222) Second glume 1.9-3.1 mm long. (223) Second glume ovate to
elliptic. (224) Second glume with trichomes <on margins>. (225) Second glume
veins 1-3 <faint>. (226) Rachilla internode 0.6-1 mm long. (227) Rachilla
rachilla flexuous, less than 1 mm wide. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous.
(229) Rachilla pronounced between the florets, or not pronounced between the
florets. (230) Rachilla terminating in a vestigial floret. (231) Callus
differentiated. (233) Callus hairs 0.1-0.15 mm long. (234) Callus hairs
shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 2.8-3.5 mm long. (236) Lemma oblong.
(237) Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface shiny. (240) Lemma hairy.
(241) Lemma with trichomes on veins only <long, sparse callus hairs>, or on
intervein region and veins. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex rounded to
truncate. (244) Lemma apex erose. (245) Lemma apex ciliate, or not ciliate.
(246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 2.5-3 mm
long. (251) Palea with scabrous veins, or with hairy veins. (285) Anthers
1-2.1 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325)
Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 0.9-1.1 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (374)
Sand. (384) In the Porsild (1964) supplement, Puccinellia arctica and P.
borealis were added to the flora of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago (Porsild
1957). The characters separating these species are: plants littoral, panicle
6-9 cm long, anthers 1.5 mm long in P. arctica, cf. plants non-littoral,
common to weedy on disturbed subarctic riverbanks and lakeshores; panicle
10-25 cm long, anthers 0.6-0.7 mm long in P. borealis (Porsild 1957). Kartesz
(1994) placed P. borealis in synonymy with P. arctica. There are specimens of
two anthers size classes at CAN, but the other characters described by Porsild
are not always consistent. Further study is needed to determine whether these
taxa should be distinguished at species level. (385) In Kartesz (1994), P.
borealis is placed in synonymy under P. arctica. Further study is needed to
determine whether these taxa should be distinguished at species level. (431)
Code used for graphics files: popuar.


Puccinellia borealis <Swallen>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) J. Washington Acad. Sci. 34: 19. 1944.
(6) Type: U.S.A., Alaska, Teller Reindeer Station, near Port Clarence, on
tundra bank, September 7, 1901, F.A. Walpole 2015. (Holotype: US 379136). (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 18-40 cm
high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (29) Prophylls 10 mm
long. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins. (31) Prophylls lacking pronounced
keels. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36)
Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming exposed <rarely>.
(38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part, or with
the margins not fused. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76)
Ligules 1.5-2.4 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous
<rarely>, or hairy. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules apices obtuse to
truncate. (81) Ligules erose. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal
<but with several cauline leaves>. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 3-10 cm
long. (90) Leaves 0.4-0.7 mm wide <when rolled>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in
bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or
spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or
scabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in
the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat, or folded, or involute. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence lanceolate to ovate. (155) Inflorescence
diffuse. (160) Inflorescence 7-11.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 15-75 mm
wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous to scabrous <scabrous towards top
of inflorescence>. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 2-5.
(165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches, or
with spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 20-80
mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches scabrous. (185) Spikelets
pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets
laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets oblong. (189) Spikelets 4.3-8.6 mm long.
(190) Spikelets 1.4-2.5 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet (3-)4-6(-8). (211)
Glumes shiny with tiny teeth on margins. (212) First glume 0.56-0.75 × the
length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.2-0.23 × spikelet length.
(214) First glume 0.9-1.1 mm long. (215) First glume ovate. (216) First glume
glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1 <faint>. (218) First glume margins
ciliate. (219) First glume apex acuminate, or acute. (220) Second glume 0.4 ×
as long as the spikelet or less. (221) Second glume shorter than the lowest
floret. (222) Second glume 1.7-1.8 mm long. (223) Second glume elliptic. (224)
Second glume with trichomes <at edge>. (225) Second glume veins 3 <faint>.
(226) Rachilla internode 0.5-0.7 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous.
(229) Rachilla pronounced between the florets, or not pronounced between the
florets. (230) Rachilla terminating in a vestigial floret. (231) Callus
differentiated. (233) Callus hairs 0.1-0.2 mm long. (234) Callus hairs shorter
than the floret. (235) Lemma 2.3-2.5 mm long. (236) Lemma oblong. (237) Lemma
rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface shiny. (240) Lemma glabrous, or
hairy. (241) Lemma with trichomes on veins only <long, sparse callus hairs>.
(242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex rounded to truncate. (244) Lemma apex
erose. (245) Lemma apex ciliate, or not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless.
(249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 2.1-2.3 mm long. (251) Palea with
scabrous veins, or with hairy veins. (285) Anthers 0.6-0.9 mm long. (296)
Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327)
Fruit 0.9-1.1 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 42 <Löve and Löve
1975>. (374) Sand. (381) This taxon is thought to be spreading east from
Beringia in North America (Porsild and Cody 1980). It is abundantly weedy in
disturbed areas of the gravel bar that the town site of Tuktoyaktuk occupies
and may be expected to spread to similar sandy and gravelly sites, especially
those disturbed by human activities. (384) In the Porsild (1964) supplement,
Puccinellia arctica and P. borealis were added to the flora of the Canadian
Arctic Archipelago (Porsild 1957). The characters separating these species
are: plants littoral, panicle 6-9 cm long, anthers 1.5 mm long in P. arctica,
cf. plants non-littoral, common to weedy on disturbed subarctic riverbanks and
lakeshores; panicle 10-25 cm long, anthers 0.6-0.7 mm long in P. borealis
(Porsild 1957). Kartesz (1994) placed P. borealis in synonymy with P. arctica.
There are specimens of two anther size classes at CAN, but the other
characters described by Porsild are not always consistent. Further study is
needed to determine whether these taxa should be distinguished at species
level. (385) Kartez (1994) placed this taxon in synonymy with P. arctica.
Porsild (1964) separated these species on habitat differences and the
characters: panicle 6-9 cm long, anthers 1.5 mm long in P. arctica; panicle
10-25 cm long, anthers 0.6-0.7 mm long in P. borealis. There are specimens of
two anther size classes at CAN, but the other characters are not always
consistent. Further study is needed to determine whether these two taxa should
be distinguished at species level. (431) Code used for graphics files: popubo.


Puccinellia bruggemanni <T.J. Sorensen>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) In A. E. Porsild, Natl. Mus. Canada Bull.
135: 80. 1955. (5) Phippsia bruggemanni (T.J. Sorensen) A. Löve and D. Löve,
Cytotax. Atlas Arct. Fl. 62. 1975. (6) Type: Canada. N.W.T.: Prince Patrick
Island, Mould Bay, around lemming burrows on mound of damp sand, 8 Aug. 1952,
P. F. Bruggeman 470. (Holotype: DAO! Isotype: CAN!). (10) Plants less than 15
cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 5-12 cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <forming dense tufts up to 10 cm in
diameter, with flowering culms much longer than the leaves>. (29) Prophylls
5-10 mm long. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins. (31) Prophylls lacking
pronounced keels <but veins conspicuous>. (32) Stems erect <or prostrate>.
(35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm
nodes not exposed <usually>, or becoming exposed <node visible in some larger
specimens>. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly
contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the
lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 1-2 mm
long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules
ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules apices obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves
(1-)2-4 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.5-1.1 mm wide <when rolled>. (91) Leaf blades
without auricles <ligules decurrent>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93)
Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or reflexed. (107)
Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous.
(119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size
to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat, or involute. (144) Flag
leaf sheaths not inflated <sometimes slightly inflated>. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence lanceolate <usually contracted>. (155)
Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 0.8-3.7 cm long. (161) Inflorescence
3-8 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous <base>, or scabrous <top>.
(164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node (1-)2(-3). (165)
Inflorescence primary branches with spreading secondary branches. (166)
Inflorescence primary branches 1.4-8.5 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary
branches smooth. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating
above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets
lanceolate. (189) Spikelets (3-)3.5-6 mm long <dark purple>. (190) Spikelets
0.7-4 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet (2-)3-4. (212) First glume 0.45-0.7
× the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.2-0.3 × spikelet length.
(214) First glume 0.8-1.7 mm long. (215) First glume ovate. (216) First glume
glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins ciliate. (219)
First glume apex obtuse. (220) Second glume 0.4 × as long as the spikelet or
less. (221) Second glume shorter than the lowest floret, or almost as long as,
or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 1.3-2.5 mm long. (223)
Second glume ovate, or elliptic, or oblanceolate. (224) Second glume glabrous.
(225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 1 mm long
<approximately>. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla not
pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost
floret. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma 2.7-3.4 mm long. (236)
Lemma elliptic. (237) Lemma rounded on the back. (238) Lemma lemma strongly
inrolled. (239) Lemma surface dull <shiny at apex>. (240) Lemma glabrous
<upper half>, or hairy <lower third, with longer hairs on the veins towards
the base of the lemma, margins incurved at the base>. (242) Lemma veins 5.
(243) Lemma apex rounded <somewhat obtuse>. (244) Lemma apex erose. (245)
Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed.
(250) Palea 2.3-2.9 mm long. (251) Palea with hairy veins <the hairs longer
towards the base>. (285) Anthers (0.6-)0.8-1.1 mm long. (296) Ovary superior.
(309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit
1.3-1.7(-2) mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28 <Bowden 1961;
Hedberg 1967 <Löve and Löve 1975>>. (374) Moist areas <this species occurs on
barren, eroding, sandy and silty flats, and in moist depressions of dune
swales.>. (380) Endemic to the Canadian Arctic. (384) When Sorensen (1955)
described this species, he commented: “Puccinellia bruggemanni superficially
resembles Poa abbreviata and, unlike most other members of the genus, is
probably not halophilous a peculiarity it shares with P. angustata. For that
reason, and because of its hairy lemmas and paleas, it may easily be mistaken
for a stunted P. angustata but may always be distinguished by the somewhat
incurved lemmas. The resemblance... is only superficial, and P. bruggemanni is
probably not even closely related to P. angustata, from which it differs by
its lack of stomata on the underside of the leaves a rare feature in
Puccinellia and one only very rarely known to occur in ×P. phryganodes, to
which species P. bruggemanni is not even closely related. There seems, on the
other hand, to be some slight indication of a relationship to the Siberian P.
tenuiflora (Turcz.) Krecz.”. (385) Superficially this taxon resembles Poa
abbreviata. It is supposedly distinguished from stunted Puccinellia angustata
by the somewhat incurved lemmas and lack of stomata on the underside of the
leaves. (428) This is the name recognized in Porsild (1964). (431) Code used
for graphics files: popubr.


Puccinellia langeana <(Berlin) T.J. Sorensen ex Hultén> subsp. langeana

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Fl. of Alaska and Yukon, 10: 1710. 1950.
(Acta. Univ. Lund. Adv. 2, 46). (5) Glyceria langeana Berlin, Ofvers. Forh.
Kongl. Svenska Vetensk. Akad. 7: 79. 1884. Puccinellia tenella subsp. langeana
(Berlin) Tzvelev in Arkt. Fl. SSSR 2: 187. 1964. (6) Type: Greenland:
Kangaitsiak, coastal sands, 30 June 1882, Kjellmns Lundstrom. (7) Puccinellia
paupercula (Holmen) Fernald and Weath., Rhodora 18: 18. 1916. Glyceria
paupercula Holmen, Repert. Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 3: 337. 1907. TYPE: Canada.
N.W.T.: Hudson Bay, Mansfield Island, 1884, R. Bell (Holotype: CAN!). (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 8-22 cm
high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (29) Prophylls 5-15 mm
long. (30) Prophylls with smooth veins. (31) Prophylls lacking pronounced
keels. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36)
Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed <even in etiolated specimens>.
(68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the
margins fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules
present. (76) Ligules 0.5-4 mm long <lower leaves 0.5-1.1 mm; upper leaves
0.8-4.0 mm>. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules
lanceolate, or ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules apices acute, or obtuse. (81)
Ligules entire. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (89) Leaves 2.2-14 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.4-0.7 mm wide <when
rolled>. (91) Leaf blades without auricles <ligules decurrent>. (92) Leaf
blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to
the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially
glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in
the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat <rarely>, or involute. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence lanceolate. (155) Inflorescence dense
<usually>, or diffuse. (160) Inflorescence 2-8 cm long. (161) Inflorescence
8-15 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164) Number of
inflorescence branches at lowest node 2 <usually>, or 3 <rarely>. (165)
Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches, or with
spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 5-34 mm
long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185) Spikelets
pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets
laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets ovate. (189) Spikelets 3-6 mm long.
(190) Spikelets 1.5-2.2 mm wide <spikelets often intensely purple>. (191)
Florets per spikelet 4-6. (212) First glume 0.45-0.75 × the length of the
second glume. (213) First glume 0.2-0.25 × spikelet length. (214) First glume
0.7-1.4 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous.
(217) First glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First
glume apex acuminate. (220) Second glume 0.4 × as long as the spikelet or
less. (221) Second glume almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret.
(222) Second glume 1.5-1.9 mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224)
Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode
0.8-1 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla not
pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost
floret. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma 2.1-2.8 mm long. (236)
Lemma oblong. (237) Lemma keeled. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma
glabrous <or rarely with some hairs on the lateral veins at the base>. (242)
Lemma veins (4-)5(-6). (243) Lemma apex acute, or rounded. (244) Lemma apex
entire, or erose. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless.
(249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 1.9-2.4 mm long. (251) Palea with
glabrous veins. (285) Anthers 0.6-0.9 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309)
Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1-1.5 mm long.
(331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 14 <Löve and Löve 1975>. (373) Substrate
type: halophytic. (374) Moist areas <occurring in peat bogs, wet sand and
clay, just above the high tide zone.>. (380) More commonly in the eastern and
western Low Arctic, not in the Queen Elizabeth Islands. Although Hultén (1968)
and Porsild (1964) recorded it only once between Alaska and Hudson Bay, the
present map in the database shows additional collections from that region.
(381) Plants of this species are indicative of the zone reached by the highest
tides. (384) Specimens analysed were annotated by T.J. Sorensen as subsp.
typica. Sorensen (1953) stated that the taxonomy and nomenclature of this
taxon were disputed from the time it was first recognized as Glyceria langeana
Berlin. He recognized the specimens from North America as subsp. typica,
distinct from those in Asia (subsp. asiatica T.J. Sorensen) and Alaska (subsp.
alaskana(Scribn. and Merr.) T.J. Sorensen). He commented that the epidermis of
the leaves of the P. langeana group is unusual when compared with other arctic
Puccinellia species because there are relatively few stomata on the underside
of the leaf and the leaf margins are finely crenulate from short, rounded,
marginal cells. (385) Sorensen (1953) considered the specimens from North
America distinct from those in Asia, subsp. asiatica T.J. Sorensen, and
Alaska, subsp. alaskana (Scribn. and Merr.) T.J. Sorensen. (431) Code used for
graphics files: popula.


Puccinellia ×phryganodes <(Trin.) Scribn. and Merr.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Contrib. U.S. Natl. Herb. 13: 78. 1910.
Atropis phryganodes (Trin.) V.I. Krecz. 1934. (5) Poa phryganodes Trin., Zap.
Imp. Akad. Fiz. Mat. Otd. 389. 1830. Atropis phryganodes (Trin.) Steffen,
Beih. Bot. Centralbl. 44: 330. 1928. Atropis phryganodes (Trin.) V.I. Krecz.
in Komarov, Fl. SSSR, 2: 480. 1934. Phippsia phryganodes (Trin.) A. Löve and
D. Löve, Cytotax. Atlas Arct. Fl. 67. 1975. (6) Type: USSR: Okhotsk coast, “in
glareosis maritimis Ochotiae, 1835, leg. Kuznetzov”. (Holotype: LE; three
Isotypes: LE, Tzvelev 1976). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15
cm high. (11) Plants 0.9-2 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
matted, or forming loose clusters. (21) Plants with conspicuously long
horizontal stems. (22) Plants stoloniferous <with infranodal branching along
the trailing stolons which makes this species unusual and conspicuous among
the arctic grasses. Plants form loose turfs with stolons arising from the leaf
axils and rooting at the lower nodes. They also develop plantlets that detach
readily>. (32) Stems decumbent, or prostrate <or procumbent>. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not
exposed <on flowering culms>, or becoming exposed <along stolons>. (38) Culm
nodes number visible 0-2. (39) Culm nodes rooting at the lower nodes. (68)
Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins
fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present.
(76) Ligules 0.7-1.5 mm long <culm ligules; 0.4-0.9 mm long, stolon ligules>.
(77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules transversely
oblong. (80) Ligules apices acute. (81) Ligules erose. (82) Leaves marcescent.
(83) Leaves <mostly along the stolons>. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves
1-3.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.4-0.8 mm wide <when rolled>. (91) Leaf blades
without auricles <ligules slightly decurrent>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud.
(93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical
<usually>. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein conspicuously larger than the lateral veins <due to heavy sclerenchyma
at abaxial surface opposite the vein>. (121) Leaf blades without bulliform
cells in a distinct row on either side of the midvein <usually>. (126) Leaf
blades involute. (151) Inflorescence paniculate <sparse>. (154) Inflorescence
lanceolate to ovate. (155) Inflorescence diffuse. (160) Inflorescence 1-4 cm
long. (161) Inflorescence 5-20 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis
glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 2-3. (165)
Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches, or with
spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 1-14 mm
long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185) Spikelets
pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets
laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate, or ovate. (189) Spikelets
6-9 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.4-3.4 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet
3-6(-7). (212) First glume 0.65-0.8 × the length of the second glume. (213)
First glume 0.2-0.3 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 1.5-2.2 mm long.
(215) First glume oblong. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins
2, or 3. (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex obtuse.
(220) Second glume 0.4 × as long as the spikelet or less. (221) Second glume
shorter than the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 2.3-2.8 mm long. (223)
Second glume ovate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3.
(226) Rachilla internode 0.9-1.1 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous.
(229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending
beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma
3.2-3.8(-4.5) mm long. (236) Lemma oblong, or lanceolate. (237) Lemma rounded
on the back. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma glabrous <slightly
emarginate, the margins thinner than the body of the lemma and whitish>. (242)
Lemma veins 4-6 <faint>. (243) Lemma apex rounded. (244) Lemma apex entire.
(245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea
well-developed. (250) Palea 2.9-3.7 mm long. (251) Palea with glabrous veins.
(285) Anthers (1.5-)2-2.5 mm long <indehiscent, without normal pollen>. (296)
Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (331)
Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 14, 21, and 28 <Löve and Löve 1975, 3
collections: 2 from Iqaluit, 1 from Southhampton Island; Sorensen 1953 and
Jorgensen et al. 1958 for Greenland; 28 for Europe, Hughes and Halliday 1980>.
(373) Substrate type: halophytic. (374) Moist areas <common on clay, silty and
sandy shores and between boulders on coasts that are undisturbed by ice
thrust. The taxon grows locally on recently eroded, Holocene, marine sediments
inland from the coast. Among the halophytic grasses this taxon has the most
northern distribution. In the Low Arctic, for example around Iqaluit, it forms
dense saline meadows that are often vivid orange with green streaks through
them, where fresh water run off between tides washes out the salt. In the High
Arctic it may be present as a few scattered runners.>. (380) Circumpolar and
wide ranging. (381) Indicative of zones usually covered by high tides or spray
from the sea. Plants usually brownish red where salt dries onto the plants
between tides. Vivid green plants occur where fresh water run off washes out
the salt on the plants between tides. (384) Bowden (1961) considered this
taxon to be a sterile, triploid hybrid of unknown parentage. Sorensen (1953)
recognized four variants of P. phryganodes, based on pedicels thickened or not
thickened, floret numbers per spikelet, lemma lengths, and epidermal cell
features. He concluded that Canadian material is mainly the “Greenland type”,
but generally with better developed pistils. Löve and Löve (1975) recognize
Phippsia phryganodes s.l. as having three subspecies from Siberia, Beringia
and Greenland all with 2n = 28. Tzvelev (1976) recognized various subspecies,
but remarked that none of them is morphologically clearly separated and may
not deserve recognition. The description by Hughes and Halliday (1980) differs
from the one given here in the following characters: “spikelets not more than
4 florets; lower glume 1.2-1.7 mm, upper glume 1.5-2.3 mm; lemma 1.5-2.5 mm”.
Jefferies and Gottlieb (1983) studied genetic variation within and between
populations of Puccinellia ×phryganodes. Because they assumed that the taxon
is a sterile triploid, they expected that the level of genetic variation would
be low, both within and between populations. They examined the electrophoretic
mobilities of isozymes of 12 systems in plants from three widely separated
populations in Arctic Canada (La Pérouse Bay, Manitoba, 58°4'N, 94°4'W;
Tuktoyaktuk, N.W.T. 69°27'N, 133°00'W; and Alexandra Fiord, Ellesmere Island,
N.W.T. 78°53'N, 75°55'W) and found a high level of variability both within and
between populations. They suggested that the unexpected discovery of
significant amounts of genetic variability indicated that sexual processes
occur in this species. Siira and Merila (1985) working in Finland found that
around the coast of Bothnian Bay, in the Baltic Sea area, the populations of
P. phryganodes had decreased greatly during the previous 20 years. They noted
that the species has “a narrow ecological amplitude and poor colonization
ability” and suggested that in some areas continuous land uplift causes fairly
rapid changes in the ecological conditions and primary succession is not
always the same. They also noted that human activity had influenced the nature
of the shorelines studied. (385) Sorensen (1953) recognized four variants of
P. phryganodes but these were not considered by Porsild (1964). Bowden (1961)
considered this taxon to be a sterile, triploid hybrid of unknown parentage.
Tzvelev (1976) recognized various subspecies, but remarked that none of them
is morphologically clearly separated and may not deserve recognition. The
description by Hughes and Halliday (1980) in Flora Europaea differs from that
in this taxonomic database by the following characters (values in parentheses
from Flora Europaea): spikelets 3-6 (not more than 4) florets; lower glume
1.5-2.2 (1.2-1.7) mm, upper glume 2.3-2.8 (1.5-2.3) mm; lemma 3.2-3.8
(1.5-2.5) mm. (428) This is the name used in Porsild 1964). (431) Code used
for graphics files: popuph.


Puccinellia poacea <T.J. Sorensen>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) In A.E. Porsild Natl. Mus. Canada Bull.
135: 81. 1955. (5) Phippsia poacea (T.J. Sorensen) A. Löve and D. Löve,
Cytotax. Atlas Arct. Fl. 66. 1975. (6) Type: Canada: N.W.T.: Ellesmere Island,
Slidre Fd., Black Top River Valley, 3 miles inland, 50 ft. alt., 20 July 1951,
J.S. Tenner 35 (Holotype: CAN!). (7) Puccinellia arctica sensu Scoggan, Fl.
Can. 322. 1978, pro parte. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15
cm high. (11) Plants 12-30 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
tufted <culms rather stout>. (29) Prophylls 5-15 mm long. (30) Prophylls with
scabrous veins <sparsely scaberulous>. (31) Prophylls with pronounced keels
<reduced, “scale blades” with more than 2 veins, more common than prophylls>.
(32) Stems erect <culm base geniculate>. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross
section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed <in shorter plants>,
or becoming exposed <in taller plants>. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-1.
(68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the
margins fused only in the lower part, or with the margins not fused. (73)
Sheaths with trichomes. (74) Sheaths scabrous <or strongly papillate>. (75)
Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.9-2.5 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78)
Ligules glabrous, or hairy <small trichomes on abaxial surface>. (79) Ligules
ovate-oblong to transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices acute, or obtuse.
(81) Ligules erose. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84)
Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves (1.6-)3-4(-8) cm long. (90) Leaves 0.4-1.3 mm
wide <when rolled>. (91) Leaf blades without auricles <ligules decurrent>.
(92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades
appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades
adaxially glabrous <or minutely scaberulous>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat
<rarely>, or involute <usually>. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154)
Inflorescence linear <oblong pyramidal>. (155) Inflorescence dense, or diffuse
<most often>. (160) Inflorescence 4-10 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 10-50 mm
wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence
branches at lowest node 5-7. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with
spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 3.5-30 mm
long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185) Spikelets
pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets
laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate. (189) Spikelets 4.8-8.4 mm
long. (190) Spikelets 1.5-4 mm wide <to 5.6 mm at anthesis>. (191) Florets per
spikelet 3-5. (212) First glume 0.5-0.65 × the length of the second glume.
(213) First glume 0.2-0.25 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 1-1.7(-2) mm
long. (215) First glume lanceolate, or ovate. (216) First glume glabrous.
(217) First glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First
glume apex acute. (220) Second glume 0.4 × as long as the spikelet or less.
(221) Second glume shorter than the lowest floret, or almost as long as, or
longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 1.9-2.2(-3) mm long. (223)
Second glume elliptic. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins
3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.6-0.8 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode
glabrous. (229) Rachilla pronounced between the florets, or not pronounced
between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret.
(231) Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma (2.1-)2.6-3.4 mm long. (236)
Lemma oblong, or ovate. (237) Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface
dull. (240) Lemma hairy. (241) Lemma with trichomes on veins only <with
sparse, long, pilose hairs on the veins in the lower fourth>. (242) Lemma
veins 5. (243) Lemma apex rounded. (244) Lemma apex erose. (245) Lemma apex
not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea
2.6-3.4 mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous veins <towards the apex, glabrous
towards the base>. (285) Anthers 1.5-2.2 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309)
Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit <unknown>.
(331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 14 <Löve and Löve 1975>. (374) Clay <This
species occurs on the silt and clay of flood plains and lake shores.>. (380)
Known only from limited sites on Ellesmere and Axel Heiberg Islands. (384)
When first described, this species was considered to be related to P. arctica
(Hook.) Fernald and Weath., differing only in its stout habit, shorter leaves,
and long exserted, spreading panicle, as well as somewhat keeled glumes and
straight, relatively firm lemmas that do not incurve at the base. (Sorensen
1955). (385) This taxon was considered to be related to P. arctica (Hook.)
Fernald and Weath., by Sorensen (1955). (428) This is the name used in Porsild
(1964). (431) Code used for graphics files: popupo.


Puccinellia pumila <(Vasey) Hitchc.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Amer. J. Bot. 21: 129. 1934. (5) Glyceria
pumila Vasey, Bull. Torrey Bot. Club 15: 48. 1888. (6) Type: Canada. British
Columbia: “salt marsh, Barclay Sound, Vancouver Island, 2 Aug. 1887”, Macoun
143. (Holotype: US). (7) Puccinellia maritima var. minor Watson in A. Gray,
Manual Ed. 6, 668. 1890. Type: Canada. Quebec, Saguenay Co., Salmon Bay,
“Labrador”, Allen s.n. (Lectotype: GH?, Isolectotypes: NY, US). Glyceria
paupercula Holm, Repert. Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 3: 337. 1907. Puccinellia
paupercula Fernald and Weath., Rhodora 18: 18. 1916. Type: Canada. N.W.T.:
“Mansfield Island, Hudson’s Bay”, 1884, Bell s.n. (Isotype?: CAN!).
Puccinellia alaskana Scribn. and Merr., Contrib. U.S. Natl. Herb. 13: 78.
1910. Type: “U.S.A. Bering Sea: Pribilof Islands, St. Paul Island”, 4 Aug
1891, Merriam s.n. (Holotype: US!). Puccinellia paupercula (Holm) Fernald and
Weath. var. longiglumis Fernald and Weath., Rhodora 18: 20. 1916. P.
longiglumis Raym. in Bowden, Can. J. Bot. 39: 134. 1961. Type: Canada. P.E.I.:
Queens Co. Bunbury, “border of salt marsh”, 28 Aug. 1912, Fernald, Long, and
St. John 6921. (Holotype: GH!, Isotype: WSU!; Paratype: Canada. P.E.I.: Queens
Co., Burnbury, “salt marsh”, 9 Aug. 1912, Fernald, Long and St. John 6920.
(GH, two paratypes CAN!, US, WSU). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more
than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 10-25 cm high <in Arctic Island specimens; plants
in southern parts of the range to 75 cm tall>. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants tufted. (29) Prophylls 10-20 mm long. (30) Prophylls with scabrous
veins. (31) Prophylls with pronounced keels. (32) Stems decumbent. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not
exposed. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with
the margins fused only in the lower part, or with the margins not fused. (73)
Sheaths glabrous, or with trichomes. (74) Sheaths scabrous <with papillae>.
(75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules (0.3-)1-2(-3.5) mm long. (77) Ligules
membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules
apices obtuse <but varying from acute to truncate>. (81) Ligules entire
<occasionally erose>. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal <but
with 2 or more cauline leaves>. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 2.5-8 cm
long <Arctic Island specimens>. (90) Leaves 0.8-1.8 mm wide <when rolled>.
(91) Leaf blades without auricles <ligules decurrent>. (92) Leaf blades rolled
in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical.
(107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface
glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein
similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades involute. (151)
Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence ovate <branches erect to
descending below horizontal at maturity>. (155) Inflorescence diffuse
<spikelets on the upper half of the branch>. (160) Inflorescence 0.4-1(-2.5)
cm long. (161) Inflorescence 2-10 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis
glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 1-5(-7). (165)
Inflorescence primary branches with spreading secondary branches. (166)
Inflorescence primary branches 1-6(-12) mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary
branches smooth. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating
above the glumes. (187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets
lanceolate. (189) Spikelets 6.7-9 mm long. (190) Spikelets 2-3 mm wide. (191)
Florets per spikelet (3-)4-5(-6). (212) First glume 0.5-0.6 × the length of
the second glume. (213) First glume 0.15-0.2 × spikelet length. (214) First
glume 1-2.7 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous.
(217) First glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins glabrous, or ciliate
<sparsely scabrous>. (219) First glume apex acute <to obtuse>. (220) Second
glume 0.4 × as long as the spikelet or less. (221) Second glume shorter than
the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 1.5-3.9 mm long. (223) Second glume
elliptic. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3(-5). (226)
Rachilla internode 0.1-0.4 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229)
Rachilla not pronounced between the florets <visible at anthesis>. (230)
Rachilla terminating in a vestigial floret. (231) Callus differentiated <very
slightly with a few sparse pilose hairs>. (233) Callus hairs 0.05-0.4 mm long.
(234) Callus hairs shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 2.4-4.2 mm long. (236)
Lemma ovate <to obovate>. (237) Lemma rounded on the back <or weakly keeled>.
(239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma glabrous, or sparsely scaberulous. (242)
Lemma veins (4-)5(-7). (243) Lemma apex acute <to obtuse>. (244) Lemma apex
entire, or erose. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless.
(249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 2.3-3.6 mm long. (251) Palea with
glabrous veins <occasionally>, or with scabrous veins <scabriform-filiform
hairs up to 0.4 mm long on upper portion of palea>. (285) Anthers
(0.7-)1.2-1.5 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1.
(325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1.3-2.6 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent.
(360) 2n = 42, or 56. (373) Substrate type: halophytic. (374) Moist areas
<growing in poorly drained sand or on wet mud at the seashore.>. (380) Low
Arctic: Reported from southern Baffin Island, Coats Island, and Southampton
Island, based on vouchers at CAN annotated by J.I. Davis, Cornell University,
1983. (381) Indicative of the zone reached by the highest tides. (384) The
description is based on a limited number of specimens and supplemented by
description in J.I. Davis (1983) Ph.D. thesis. “Puccinellia pumila is
exclusively coastal. It is distinguishable from other species in the P.
nuttalliana complex by the entire, erose or sparsely scabrous margin of the
lemma, as opposed to the predominantly scabrous margin typical of the other
four species (P. grandis Swallen, P. nutkaensis (J. Presl) Fernald and Weath.,
and P. nuttalliana (Schult.) Hitchc.). It is more glabrous overall than any
other species in the complex” (Davis 1983). McJannet et al. (1993) followed
Kartez (1994) and used P. kurilensis (Takeda) Honda for members of this taxon.
J.I. Davis was not prepared to consider North American P. pumila synonymous
with P. kurilensis (personal communication 1994). (385) Not in Porsild (1964).
Relatively recently collected in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. McJannet et
al. (1993) followed Kartez (1994) and used P. kurilensis (Takeda) Honda for
members of this taxon. J.I. Davis was not prepared to consider North American
P. pumila synonymous with P. kurilensis, (personal communication 1994). (431)
Code used for graphics files: popupu.


Puccinellia vaginata <(Lange) Fernald and Weath.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Rhodora 18: 14. 1916. (5) Glyceria
vaginata Lange Fl. Dan. t. 2583. 1885. Name combination, but little taxonomic
description. (6) Type: Greenland: Niakormnak pr. Umanank, July 1836, J. Vahl
s.n. (Isotype: CAN!). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm
high. (11) Plants 10-30(-40) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
tufted. (29) Prophylls 12-30 mm long. (30) Prophylls with scabrous veins. (31)
Prophylls with pronounced keels. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval
in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed <in short
plants>, or becoming exposed <in taller plants>. (38) Culm nodes number
visible 0-1. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths
with the margins fused only in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous <or
slightly papillate>. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.3-1.5 mm long. (77)
Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong. (80)
Ligules apices acute. (81) Ligules entire, or lacerate. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems <tall plants>, or mostly
basal <short plants>. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 1-6 cm long. (90)
Leaves 0.5-1.6 mm wide <when rolled>. (91) Leaf blades without auricles
<ligules decurrent>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear.
(96) Leaf blades spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially
glabrous, or scabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf
blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein conspicuously larger than
the lateral veins. (126) Leaf blades involute. (151) Inflorescence paniculate.
(154) Inflorescence lanceolate <loosely, becoming pyramidal, exserted 1/3-1/2
the length of the culm axis>. (155) Inflorescence diffuse. (160) Inflorescence
(7.5-)8-12(-13) cm long. (161) Inflorescence 30-125 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous <or sparsely scaberulous>. (164) Number of
inflorescence branches at lowest node 1-2. (165) Inflorescence primary
branches with appressed secondary branches, or with spreading secondary
branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 10-55 mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches smooth, or scabrous. (185) Spikelets
pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets
laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate. (189) Spikelets (3-)5-8 mm
long. (190) Spikelets 1.1-2.6 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet (2-)3-5(-6).
(212) First glume 0.6-0.65 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume
0.1-0.2 × spikelet length. (214) First glume (0.7-)0.9-1.2(-2) mm long. (215)
First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1.
(218) First glume margins ciliate. (219) First glume apex acute. (220) Second
glume 0.4 × as long as the spikelet or less. (221) Second glume shorter than
the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 1.4-2(-2.6) mm long. (223) Second glume
ovate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3 <obscure>.
(226) Rachilla internode 1-1.5 mm long. (227) Rachilla rachilla tough, 1 mm
wide or more. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla pronounced
between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret.
(231) Callus not differentiated. (235) Lemma 2.1-4.2 mm long. (236) Lemma
obovate <“broadly obovate-truncate”>. (237) Lemma rounded on the back. (239)
Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma hairy. (241) Lemma with trichomes on intervein
region and veins <in lower fourth of lemma, the hairs short and sparse,
predominantly on the veins>. (242) Lemma veins 3-5. (243) Lemma apex rounded
<or obliquely truncate>. (244) Lemma apex entire, or erose <minutely>. (245)
Lemma apex ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed.
(250) Palea 2-4.6 mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous veins. (285) Anthers
0.6-0.8 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325)
Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1.7-1.9 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360)
2n = 56 <Bowden (1961), one count from Southampton Island, Jorgensen et al.
(1958) three counts from Greenland>. (373) Substrate type: halophytic. (374)
Moist areas <growing on marine sediments along the shore and on eroding,
raised marine sediments inland. In the Low Arctic it forms large tussocks near
bird cliffs and human habitations. In the High Arctic it is relatively rare.>.
(380) Occurring in North America, Greenland, eastern Siberia and Cape Lamanon,
Russia; the distribution is not continuous. (384) This taxon was considered
superficially similar to P. coarctata by Fernald and Weatherby (1916).
Sorensen (1953) observed that plants of P. vaginata are remarkable for their
soft texture, large drooping panicles, which are just exserted above the
slightly inflated, uppermost culm leaf sheaths, and by the relatively large,
loose and conspicuously glossy spikelets. Grulke and Bliss (1988) in a study
of comparative life history characteristics of two High Arctic grasses noted
that Puccinellia vaginata occurs in xeric microsites with little soil
disturbance. Drought stress that reduced whole plant biomass of Phippsia, the
species that P. vaginata was being compared with, affected only seedlings of
the latter species. Root biomass remained constant. Grulke and Bliss (1988)
found that P. vaginata was relatively long lived (living on average 35 years
and a maximum of 74 years). They noted that the mean age of initial
reproduction was relatively late when compared to temperate species, that is
26 + or - 9 years. Production of viable seeds in P. vaginata was restricted by
short growing seasons, low solar radiation, and low temperatures. During
stressful years P. vaginata usually had low carbon allocation to reproduction,
and low rates of mortality. Grulke and Bliss (1988) concluded that P. vaginata
has most characteristics of a stress-tolerant species. (385) Considered
superficially similar to P. coarctica by Fernald and Weatherby (1916). (428)
This is the name used in Porsild (1964). (431) Code used for graphics files:
popuvg.


Puccinellia vahliana <(Liebm.) Scribn. and Merr.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Contr. U.S. Natl. Herb. 13: 78. 1910. (5)
Poa vahliana Liebm., Fl. Dan. 2401. 1845. Glyceria vahliana (Liebm.) Th. Fr.
Ofvers Förh Kongl. Svenska Vetensk. Akad. 26: 139. 1869. Colpodium vahlianum
(Liebm.) Nevski in Komarov Fl. SSSR 2: 436. 1934. Phippsia vahliana (Liebm.)
A. Löve and D. Löve, Cytotax. Atlas Arct. Fl. 62. 1975. (6) Type: “Niakornak
pr. Umarak” July 1836, J. Vahl s.n. (Isotype: CAN!). (10) Plants less than 15
cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 5.5-16.5 cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted <with characteristic yellowish, curly
roots, illustrated in the image library>. (29) Prophylls 9-12 mm long. (30)
Prophylls with smooth veins. (31) Prophylls lacking pronounced keels <i.e. not
strongly folded at the prominent veins>. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular
or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed
<very rarely a node may become exposed>. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into
the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part. (73)
Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 1-2.4 mm long <to 4.0 mm
long in Greenland specimens>. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous.
(79) Ligules lanceolate. (80) Ligules apices acute, or obtuse. (81) Ligules
entire. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (89) Leaves 3-5 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.2-4 mm wide <when folded>.
(91) Leaf blades without auricles <ligules decurrent>. (92) Leaf blades folded
in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or
spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf
blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120)
Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (121) Leaf
blades bulliform cells in distinct rows on either side of the midvein. (126)
Leaf blades flat <usually, but tending to fold on drying>. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate <barely exserted at anthesis, but elongating later>. (154)
Inflorescence linear, or ovate <very variable>. (155) Inflorescence dense.
(160) Inflorescence 2-3.5 cm long <0.9-5 cm long, Greenland specimens>. (161)
Inflorescence 5-16 mm wide <to 22 mm wide, Greenland specimens>. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at
lowest node 2. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary
branches, or with spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary
branches 4-11(-25) mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187)
Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate, or ovate. (189)
Spikelets 4-5.5 mm long <3.2-7.5 mm in Greenland specimens>. (190) Spikelets
1-4 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 2-3. (212) First glume 0.8-0.9 × the
length of the second glume <appearing subequal>. (213) First glume 0.45-0.6 ×
spikelet length. (214) First glume 2-3 mm long. (215) First glume lanceolate.
(216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1(-3). (218) First glume
margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acute, or obtuse <“subacute”>. (220)
Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221) Second glume shorter
than the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 2.5-3.5 mm long. (223) Second glume
ovate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla
internode 0.8-1.2 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla
not pronounced between the florets <slender, abruptly thickened at the
insertion of theflorets; surface of abscission layer disc-like>. (230)
Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus not
differentiated. (235) Lemma 3-3.8 mm long. (236) Lemma lanceolate <broadly>.
(237) Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma hairy.
(241) Lemma with trichomes on intervein region and veins <densely in rows on
the veins in lower half and also on interveins towards base of the lemma>.
(242) Lemma veins (3-)5. (243) Lemma apex acute. (244) Lemma apex entire, or
erose <with age>. (245) Lemma apex ciliate <towards base>. (246) Lemma apex
awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 2.9-4 mm long. (251) Palea
with hairy veins <spinulose towards the apex, with long hairs towards the
base>. (285) Anthers 0.9-1.5 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2.
(317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1.7-2.2 mm long. (331)
Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 14 <Löve and Löve 1975>. (374) Moist areas, or
snow beds <often a pioneering species in moist clay and silt by alpine brooks,
ephemeral lakes, and on snowbeds.>. (380) High Arctic. (381) A species that
indicates relatively recently disturbed ground. (384) Colpodium vahlianum
(Liebm.) Nevski, in Porsild (1964). It was placed in the genus Puccinellia,
subgenus Pseudocolpodium (Tzvelev) W.E. Hughes by Hughes and Halliday (1980).
This subgenus differs from subgenus Puccinellia in which all our other
puccinellias are placed, in that the leaf epidermis is not differentiated into
long and short cells, the rachilla is slender and abruptly thickened at the
insertion of the florets, and the glumes, with divergent veins, are subequal,
and almost as long as the lemma. It differs from the other puccinellias
observed in having yellowish, thickish, curly roots (illustrated in the image
library), leaves folded in bud, and bulliform cells on either side of the
blade midvein. (385) Colpodium vahlianum (Liebm.) Nevski. This taxon was
placed in the genus Puccinellia, subgenus Pseudocolpodium (Tzvelev) W.E.
Hughes, (Hughes and Halliday 1980 in Flora Europaea). It differs from the
other puccinellias observed in having yellowish, thickish, curly roots, leaves
folded in bud, and bulliform cells on either side of the blade midvein and the
leaf epidermis is not differentiated into long and short cells. The rachilla
is slender and abruptly thickened at the insertion of the florets, and the
glumes, with divergent veins, are subequal, and almost as long as the lemma.
(431) Code used for graphics files: popuvh.


×Pucciphippsia vacillans <(Th. Fr.) Tzvelev>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Nov. Sist. Pl. Vasc. (Leningrad) 8: 76.
1971. Probably a hybrid Phippsia algida × Puccinellia vahliana (Hedberg 1962).
(5) Catabrosa concinna Th. Fr. subsp. vacillans Th. Fr., in Ofvers. Förh.
Kongl. Vetensk. Akad. Stockh. 26: 142. 1869. Colpodium vacillans (Th. Fr.)
Polunin, Circumpolar Arct. Fl. 46. 1959. (6) Type: Described from Spitzbergen,
Belsound, at foot of the hills, a J. Vahl collection became Th. Fries 1869.
(10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 15-23
cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (32) Stems erect.
(35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm
nodes becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-2. (68) Sheaths
abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only
in the lower part. (73) Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules
1.3-2.7 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules
ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules apices acute, or obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (82)
Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves
alternate. (89) Leaves 3-8 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.5-2.5 mm wide. (92) Leaf
blades folded in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades spreading from
the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein conspicuously larger than the lateral veins. (121) Leaf blades
bulliform cells in distinct rows on either side of the midvein. (126) Leaf
blades flat, or involute. (144) Flag leaf sheaths inflated, or not inflated.
(151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence lanceolate <a contracted
panicle, or diffuse>. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 3-4 cm
long. (161) Inflorescence 10-20 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis
glabrous. (164) Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 5 <or more>.
(165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed secondary branches, or
with spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 1.4-14
mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185) Spikelets
pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets
laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate to ovate. (189) Spikelets
2.5-3 mm long. (190) Spikelets 0.8-1.6 mm wide <Phippsia-like>. (191) Florets
per spikelet (1-)2(-3). (212) First glume 0.5-0.65 × the length of the second
glume. (213) First glume 0.2-0.25 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 0.5-0.8
mm long. (215) First glume ovate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First
glume veins 0-1. (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex
obtuse. (220) Second glume 0.4 × as long as the spikelet or less. (221) Second
glume shorter than the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 1.1-1.3 mm long.
(223) Second glume ovate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume
veins 1. (226) Rachilla internode 0.2-2.2 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode
glabrous, or hairy. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230)
Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus not
differentiated. (235) Lemma 2.3-2.5 mm long. (236) Lemma ovate. (237) Lemma
rounded on the back. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma hairy. (241) Lemma
with trichomes on intervein region and veins <in lower third>. (242) Lemma
veins (1-)3. (243) Lemma apex acute. (244) Lemma apex entire, or erose. (245)
Lemma apex ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed.
(250) Palea 2-2.3 mm long. (251) Palea with hairy veins. (285) Anthers 0.9-1
mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a
caryopsis. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 21 <Hedberg 1962>. (374) Moist
areas <damp open habitats.>. (380) Known in Canada from Craig harbour,
Ellesmere Island, and near Resolute, Cornwallis Island. (384) “Boivin (1967)
published ×Maltea for what he considered to be the intergeneric hybrid
Phippsia × Puccinellia. As this is not a condensed formula, the name cannot be
used for that intergeneric hybrid, for which the correct name is
×Pucciphippsia Tzvelev (1971). Boivin did, however, provide a Latin
description and designate a type; consequently, Maltea is a validly published
generic name and is correct if its type is treated as belonging to a separate
genus, not a nothogenus (Greuter et al. 1994). Hedberg (1962) found this
hybrid growing at an archeological site, on Cornwallis Island, near the former
site of the village at Resolute close to the seashore. His detailed
description includes photographs comparing spikelets, leaf cross sections, and
chromosome studies. Canadian ×Pucciphippsia involves Phippsia algida as the
Phippsia parent, but in Europe, hybrids with P. concinna may occur (Hedberg
1962). This may explain slight differences between this description and that
given by Halliday and Hughes (1980). (385) Not in Porsild (1964) although
described by Hedberg (1962) from collections near the Thule site, Resolute
Bay, Cornwallis Island. (431) Code used for graphics files: poppva.


Trisetum spicatum <(L.) K. Richter>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Pl. Eur. 1: 59. 1890. (5) Aira spicata L.
Sp. Pl. 64. 1753. Avena mollis Michx., Fl. Bor. Amer. 1: 72. 1803. Trisetum
spicatum var. molle (Michx.) Beal, Grasses N. Amer. 2: 377. 1896. Trisetum
alaskanum Nash, Bull. New York Bot. Gard. 2: 155. 1901. Trisetum spicatum var.
alaskanum Malte ex Louis-Marie, Rhodora 30: 239. 1928. Trisetum spicatum
subsp. alaskanum Hultén, Svensk Bot. Tidskr. 53: 210. 1959. (6) Type:
described from Northern Sweden, Lapland (Tzvelev 1976). (7) Trisetum spicatum
var. pilosiglume Fern. Rhodora 18: 195. 1916. Type: Canada. Newfoundland:
Notre Dame Bay, 1911, M.L. Fernald, K.M. Wiegand and E.B. Bartram 4593.
(Isotype: CAN!). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high.
(11) Plants 10-40 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted.
(32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems
densely hairy. (37) Culm nodes not exposed. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted
into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part.
(73) Sheaths with trichomes. (74) Sheaths hirsute. (75) Ligules present. (76)
Ligules 0.8-3 mm long. (77) Ligules a fringed membrane. (78) Ligules hairy.
(79) Ligules transversely oblong. (80) Ligules apices acute to truncate. (81)
Ligules erose, or lacerate. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal.
(84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 17-85 cm long. (90) Leaves 1.2-2.2 mm wide
<when flat>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud <very prominent ribs may lead to
margins touching, as with blades folded in bud>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96)
Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf
blades adaxially hairy. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairy <softly
villous, or puberulent>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades
midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat, or
involute. (151) Inflorescence paniculate <dense, cylindrical or ovoid, often
deep purple brown, with prominent twisted, geniculate awns>. (154)
Inflorescence linear. (155) Inflorescence dense. (160) Inflorescence 2-5 cm
long. (161) Inflorescence 5-13 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis hairy
<strongly pubescent with long, soft hairs>. (164) Number of inflorescence
branches at lowest node 3-4. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with
appressed secondary branches, or with spreading secondary branches. (166)
Inflorescence primary branches 0.2-0.8 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary
branches scabrous <hairy>. (185) Spikelets pedicellate <pedicels are very
short>. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (187) Spikelets
laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets lanceolate, or ovate. (189) Spikelets
3.9-6.6(-7.5) mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.5-3 mm wide. (191) Florets per
spikelet 2-3. (212) First glume 0.74-0.85 × the length of the second glume.
(213) First glume 0.6-0.7 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 2.5-4.5 mm
long. (215) First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First
glume veins 1. (218) First glume margins ciliate <very few and short hairs>.
(219) First glume apex acuminate. (220) Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the
spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest
floret. (222) Second glume 3.4-5.5 mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate.
(224) Second glume glabrous, or with trichomes <scaberulous on keel>. (225)
Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.8-1.2 mm long. (228) Rachilla
internode hairy. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230)
Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated.
(232) Callus hairy. (233) Callus hairs 0.1-0.3 mm long. (234) Callus hairs
shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma (3.5-)4.5-5.3 mm long. (236) Lemma
lanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled <slightly>. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240)
Lemma sparsely scaberulous. (242) Lemma veins 3. (243) Lemma apex acute. (244)
Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awned. (247)
Awn arising from below the apex but above the middle <affixed at the upper
third or fourth of the lemma, bent and twisted>. (249) Palea well-developed.
(250) Palea 3.7-4.2 mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous veins. (285) Anthers
(0.6-)1-1.2 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1.
(325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 2.3-2.7 mm long. (331) Fruit indehiscent.
(360) 2n = 28 <Löve and Löve 1975, 35 records>. (374) Clay, or sand <commonly
found in well-drained, silty, sandy, or gravelly soils, often at the edge of
disturbed terrain, such as the edge of solifluction lobes, thaw-flow slides,
and around disturbed construction sites in settlements.>. (380) Circumpolar,
arctic-alpine. (381) This species is an early colonizer of disturbed sandy and
silty ground. The plants are relatively short and are eventually crowded out
of a habitat by taller grass species such as Poa glauca. (384) Hultén (1959)
reported on the T. spicatum complex and recognized several varieties, stating
that plants in the High Arctic conform closely to subsp. spicatum in having
dense spike-like inflorescences and a violet colour zone on the glumes and
lemmas, while their margins are brown. The culm is strongly pubescent with
long, soft, and (except at the top) downward pointing hairs. The panicle
branches are pubescent as well as the sheaths and the awn is affixed at the
upper third or forth of the lemma and bent and twisted. The flowers
considerably overtop the glumes. Randall and Hilu (1986) studied T. spicatum
throughout its North American distribution and concluded that the data for 33
morphological characters revealed extreme variation within the species and did
not support the recognition of infraspecific taxa or the elevation of the
hexaploids to specific rank. (385) Hultén (1959) recognized several varieties
in this taxon, but these were not included in Porsild (1964) or maintained by
Randall and Hilu (1986). (428) This is the name used in Porsild (1964). (431)
Code used for graphics files: potrsp.


Agropyron latiglume <(Scribn. and J.G. Sm.) Rydb.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) = Elymus
alaskanus. (385) = Elymus alaskanus. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: poapla.


Alopecurus aequalis <Sobol.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) Mentioned in
Porsild 1964, as occurring in Alaska, Labrador,and in Greenland to lat. 71°N,
Eurasia. Not yet recorded from the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. (385)
Mentioned in Porsild 1964, as occurring in Alaska, Labrador, and in Greenland
to lat. 71°N, Eurasia. Not yet recorded from the Canadian Arctic Archipelago.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
poalae.


Arctagrostis latifolia subsp. arundinacea <(Trin.) Tzvelev>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Grasses N. Amer. 2: 317. 1896. (6) Type:
Alaska: “In archipelago a Kotzebue dicto” (Isotype, LE, fragment of Type
CAN!). (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
24-150 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (21) Plants with conspicuously
long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems, or without easily seen
horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes elongate. (24)
Rhizomes 1.5-3 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales smooth. (26) Rhizome scales 10-35
mm long. (27) Rhizome scales glabrous. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular
or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or
becoming exposed <uppermost sheath>. (38) Culm nodes number visible 2-6. (39)
Culm nodes rooting at the lower nodes. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into
the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part. (73)
Sheaths glabrous. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 3-7(-9.4) mm long. (77)
Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules transversely oblong.
(80) Ligules apices obtuse. (81) Ligules erose, or lacerate. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate.
(89) Leaves 4-35 cm long. (90) Leaves 5-10 mm wide. (92) Leaf blades rolled in
bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or
spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or scabrous
<scaberulous>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface scabrous <scaberulous>. (119)
Leaf blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to
other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence oblong, or not applicable <pyramidal>. (155)
Inflorescence diffuse. (160) Inflorescence 12.5-27 cm long. (161)
Inflorescence 7-74 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (164)
Number of inflorescence branches at lowest node 3-8. (165) Inflorescence
primary branches with spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence
primary branches 8-130 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches scabrous.
(185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes.
(187) Spikelets laterally compressed. (188) Spikelets oblong. (189) Spikelets
3-5.5 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1-2.6 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 1.
(212) First glume 0.75-0.85 × the length of the second glume. (213) First
glume 0.65-0.75 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 2.3-3.6 mm long. (215)
First glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins
1(-2). (218) First glume margins glabrous. (219) First glume apex acute. (220)
Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet, or as long, or longer than the
spikelet <a very variable character in subsp. arundinacea, and one that has
been used to suggest varieties or even species differences (see Aiken et al.
199?)>. (221) Second glume shorter than the lowest floret, or almost as long
as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 3-4.4 mm long. (223)
Second glume lanceolate. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins
3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.2-0.4 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode hairy.
(230) Rachilla terminating in a well-formed floret. (231) Callus not
differentiated. (235) Lemma 3.8-4.5 mm long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237)
Lemma keeled. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma hairy <puberulent, small
trichomes similar to lemma surface>. (242) Lemma veins 3-5. (243) Lemma apex
acute. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex
awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 3.4-4 mm long. (251) Palea
with scabrous veins. (285) Anthers 1.7-3 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309)
Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 1.7-2 mm long.
(331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28 <Tzvlev 1976>. (373) Substrate type:
halophytic <tundra>. (384) Excluded at this time, as this subspecies has not
been recorded on the Arctic Islands (Aiken and Lefkovitch 1990). (385)
Excluded at this time, as this subspecies has not been recorded on the Arctic
Islands (Aiken and Lefkovitch 1990). (424) Morphological data not coded. (431)
Code used for graphics files: poarar.


Bromus pumpellianus <Scribn.> var. arcticus <(Shear) A.E. Porsild>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) Mentioned in
Porsild 1964 as common on coastal plains of the Yukon and western N.W.T., but
not yet reported from the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. (385) Mentioned in
Porsild 1964 as common on coastal plains of the Yukon and western N.W.T., but
not yet reported from the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: pobrpu.


Calamagrostis chordorrhiza <A.E. Porsild>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) The single record
from the Arctic Archipelago in Porsild (1964) suggests that this taxon was
collected at Mould Bay, Prince Patrick Island. A possible voucher for this
record is at DAO and was annotated to C. stricta by C.W. Greene in 1980. The
type specimen of C. chordorrhiza, collected from the Mackenzie River Delta,
68°40’N, hill back of Reindeer Station, was examined by C.W. Greene, College
of Atlantic, Maine, in 1987 and annotated as C. stricta (Timm) Koeler
approaching subsp. inexpansa(Gray) C.W. Greene. (385) The single record from
the Arctic Archipelago in Porsild (1964) suggests that this taxon was
collected at Mould Bay, Prince Patrick Island. A possible voucher specimen is
at DAO and was annotated to C. stricta by C.W. Greene in 1980. The type
specimen of C. chordorrhiza, collected from the Mackenzie River Delta,
68°40’N, hill back of Reindeer Station, was examined by C.W. Greene, College
of Atlantic, Maine, in 1987 and annotated as C. stricta (Timm) Koeler
approaching subsp. inexpansa(Gray) C.W. Greene. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: pocach.


Calamagrostis lapponica <(Wahlenb.) Hartm.> var. nearctica <A.E. Porsild>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) = C. lapponica
(Wahlenb.) Hartm. (Greene 1980). Porsild (1964) mapped one record for the
Arctic Archipelago from Baffin Island, near Iqaluit. The voucher is not at
CAN, and neither of the first two authors, who have spent considerable time
doing field work in the area, have seen evidence of this taxon on Baffin
Island. (385) = C. lapponica (Wahlenb.) Hartm. (Greene 1980). Porsild (1964)
mapped one record for the Arctic Archipelago from Baffin Island, near Iqaluit.
The voucher is not at CAN, and neither of the first two authors, who have
spent considerable time doing field work in the area, have seen evidence of
this taxon on Baffin Island. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code
used for graphics files: pocalp.


Calamagrostis neglecta <(Ehrh.) P.G. Gaertn., B. Mey, and Scherb.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) Incorrectly C.
neglecta (Ehrh.) Fl. d. Wett. in Porsild (1964). = C. stricta subsp. stricta
(Timm) Koeler., Greene (1980). (385) Incorrectly C. neglecta (Ehrh.) Fl. d.
Wett. in Porsild (1964). = C. stricta subsp. stricta (Timm) Koeler, (Greene
1984). Although Porsild (1964) mapped three records of this taxon in the High
Arctic we have not been able to confirm these records with voucher specimens.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
pocang.


Calamagrostis stricta subsp. inexpansa <(Gray) C.W. Greene>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Amer. J. Bot. 71: 286. 1984. (11) Plants
25-100 cm high. (15) Plants tufted, or forming loose clusters. (21) Plants
with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (24) Rhizomes 0.5-1.5 mm
wide. (25) Rhizome scales smooth. (26) Rhizome scales 5-15 mm long. (27)
Rhizome scales glabrous. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems glabrous, or not
applicable. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes
number visible 2. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72)
Sheaths with the margins fused only in the lower part. (75) Ligules present.
(76) Ligules 2-6.5 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules hairy
<abaxial surface>. (79) Ligules lanceolate. (80) Ligules apices acute. (81)
Ligules entire, or erose. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal.
(84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 5-22 cm long. (90) Leaves 2-4.5 mm wide
<when flat>. (91) Leaf blades without auricles <ligules decurrent>. (92) Leaf
blades rolled in bud. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading
from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially hairy. (112) Leaf blades
abaxial surface scabrous. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other
veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat, or involute. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence linear, or lanceolate, or not applicable
<diffuse>. (160) Inflorescence 5-23.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 10-50 mm
wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis scabrous. (165) Inflorescence primary
branches with appressed secondary branches, or with spreading secondary
branches. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 7.5-40(-75) mm long. (167)
Inflorescence primary branches scabrous. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186)
Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (189) Spikelets (2.8-)3.3-4.7 mm
long. (190) Spikelets 1-3 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 1. (212) First
glume 0.95-1 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.8-0.9 ×
spikelet length. (214) First glume 2.8-4.3 mm long. (215) First glume
lanceolate. (217) First glume veins 1(-2). (219) First glume apex acute. (220)
Second glume as long, or longer than the spikelet. (221) Second glume almost
as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume 2.8-4.5 mm
long. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224) Second glume with trichomes. (225)
Second glume veins (1-)3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.6-0.8 mm long <with hairs
longer than rachilla>. (228) Rachilla internode hairy. (229) Rachilla not
pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost
floret. (231) Callus differentiated. (233) Callus hairs 1.2-2.2 mm long. (234)
Callus hairs shorter than the floret, or subequal to the floret. (235) Lemma
(2.4-)3-3.7 mm long. (236) Lemma ovate. (237) Lemma rounded on the back. (239)
Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma sparsely scaberulous <everywhere scaberulous>.
(242) Lemma veins (3-)5. (243) Lemma apex acute, or rounded. (244) Lemma apex
lacerate. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (249) Palea well-developed. (250)
Palea 1.9-2.6 mm long. (251) Palea with glabrous veins, or with scabrous veins
<scaberulous>. (285) Anthers 1.3-2 mm long. (327) Fruit 1.3-1.6 mm long. (360)
2n = 84-123 <ca. Greene 1984>. (373) Substrate type: halophytic. (384) See
comments under C. neglecta. (385) Not yet recorded on the arctic islands.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Data based on C.W. Greene annotated
specimens. (431) Code used for graphics files: pocain.


Colpodium vahlianum <(Liebm.) Nevski>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) = Puccinellia
vahliana (Liebm.) Scribn. and Merr. (385) = Puccinellia vahliana (Liebm.)
Scribn. and Merr. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for
graphics files: pocova.


Deschampsia alpina <(L.) Roem. and Schult.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) The voucher for
the single record of taxon in Porsild (1964) from S.E. Baffin Island, or
possibly Resolution Island is not at CAN. Given the taxonomic confusion
concerning this taxon and the possiblity that it is merely a vegetatively
proliferating form of D. cespitosa s.l. it is not considered a member of the
flora at this time. (385) The voucher for the single record of taxon in
Porsild (1964) from S.E. Baffin Island, or possibly Resolution Island is not
at CAN. Given the taxonomic confusion concerning this taxon and the possiblity
that it is merely a vegetatively proliferating form of D. cespitosa s.l. it is
not considered a member of the flora at this time. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: podeal.


Deschampsia cespitosa subsp. glauca <(Hartm.) Hartm.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Svensk o. Norsk Excurs. Fl.: 15. 1846.
(5) D. cespitosa var. glauca (Hartm.) Lindm. f. non Regel. Aira caespitosa
var. glauca (Hartm.) Anderss. Fl. Scand. Gram. 72: 1852. A. glauca Hartm.
Skand. Fl. ed. 1. add. 748. Handb. Scand. Fl. ed. 5. 297. 1849. (6) Type:
“Hab. in regionibus borealibus, ut insula Frösön jemtia”. Scandinavia. (7) D.
glauca Hartm., Handb. Skand. Fl. 448. 1820. Type: “Sänd frän Jemtl. af H: r
Rect. Backman.)” ?? MJD Scandinavia. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more
than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 4-25 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants tufted. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section.
(36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed <usually>, or becoming
exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible 0-2 <when visible>. (68) Sheaths
abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins fused only
in the lower part. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 1-3.6(-5) mm long. (77)
Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules lanceolate. (80)
Ligules apices acuminate, or acute. (81) Ligules entire, or erose, or
lacerate. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (89) Leaves 0.5-13.4 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.3-0.8 mm wide <when
rolled, to 1.6 mm when flat>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades
linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from the
vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or scabrous <Canadian
specimens assigned to subsp. glauca have greyish leaves that are not
noticeably “rough”>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf
blade venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other
veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf blades folded <usually>. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate. (154) Inflorescence linear, or not applicable <pyramidal>. (160)
Inflorescence 2-8 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-20 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (166) Inflorescence primary branches 7.5-30
mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185) Spikelets
pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (189) Spikelets
3.9-5.2 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1-2.3 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 2.
(212) First glume 0.9-1 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume
0.7-0.85 × spikelet length. (214) First glume 2.8-4.4 mm long. (215) First
glume lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1. (219)
First glume apex acute. (220) Second glume as long, or longer than the
spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest
floret. (222) Second glume 3-4.5 mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224)
Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode
0.7-1.2 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous, or hairy. (229) Rachilla
not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the
uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated. (233) Callus hairs 0.8-1.2 mm
long. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 3-3.8 mm long.
(236) Lemma ovate, or lanceolate. (237) Lemma rounded on the back. (239) Lemma
surface shiny. (240) Lemma glabrous. (242) Lemma veins 5 <lateral veins
faint>. (243) Lemma apex rounded, or truncate. (244) Lemma apex erose, or
lacerate. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (246) Lemma apex awned. (247) Awn
arising from the middle or below. (248) Awn 1.3-2.5 mm long. (249) Palea
well-developed. (250) Palea 2.5-3.2 mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous veins.
(285) Anthers 1.6-1.8 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317)
Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 26, or
56 <2n = 26 recorded by Zhukova (1973), 2n = 52 (approx.) recorded by Zhukova
and Petrovskii (1976). No Canadian counts known>. (373) Substrate type:
halophytic. (380) One specimen from Ellef Ringes Island has been considered to
approach this subspecies: it’s occurrence in the Canadian Arctic is not well
understood at this time. (384) This taxon is distinguished from subsp.
brevifolia by “panicles usually sparse and lax, pyramidal, rarely somewhat
compressed and dense, but also with fairly long branches; lamina fairly rough,
convolute, usually with a greyish tinge” Tzvelev (1976). Data were gathered
from a specimen collected at Isachen, on Ellef Ringes Island, 78°47'N,
103°32'W, that appeared similar to this taxon as reported in Tzvelev (1976).
As the collection site is among the most bleak in the Canadian Arctic
Archipelago and the specimen has plants less than 10 cm tall, with
pre-anthesis inflorescences, these may well be no more than environmentally
stressed plants of D. cespitosa subsp. brevifolia. The status of this taxon in
Canada is considered uncertain at this time. (385) Not recognized by Porsild
(1964). Data were gathered from a stunted specimen collected at Isachen, Ellef
Ringes Island 78°47’N; 103°32’W that appeared similar to this taxon as
reported in Tzvelev (1976). Its status in Canada is considered uncertain at
this time. (431) Code used for graphics files: podegl.


Deschampsia flexuosa <(L.) Trin.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) Mentioned in
Porsild 1964 as occurring on dry acidic and turfy places of boreal eastern
North America and Eurasia. No records on the Canadian Arctic Archipelago have
been found. (385) Mentioned in Porsild 1964 as occurring on dry acidic and
turfy places of boreal eastern North America and Eurasia. No records on the
Canadian Arctic Archipelago have been found. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: podefl.


Dupontia fisheri <R. Br.> subsp. psilosantha <(Rupr.) Hultén>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) Porsild (1964)
recognized this taxon and also D. fisheri subsp. psilosantha (Rupr.) Hultén,
which we place in synonymy with D. fisheri. While extreme morphological
expressions occur, there appears to be a continuum of variation among Canadian
specimens. (385) Porsild (1964) recognized this taxon and also D. fisheri
subsp. psilosantha (Rupr.) Hultén, which we place in synonymy with D. fisheri.
While extreme morphological expressions occur, there appears to be a continuum
of variation among Canadian specimens. (424) Morphological data not coded.
(431) Code used for graphics files: podufi.


Elymus arenarius <L.> subsp. mollis <(Trin.) Hultén>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) = Leymus mollis
(Trin.) Pilger. (385) = Leymus mollis (Trin.) Pilger. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: poelar.


Festuca rubra <L.> var. arenaria <(Osbeck) Th. Fr.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) Name mentioned in
Porsild (1964). Here treated as synonymous with Festuca rubra subsp.
richardsonii Hook. (385) (Porsild 1964). Treated as synonymous with Festuca
rubra subsp. richardsonii Hook. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code
used for graphics files: pofear.


Festuca saximontana <Rydb.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) Tall specimens of
F. brachyphylla have been found around Iqaluit, Baffin Island. The voucher for
the record of F. saximontana mapped by Frederiksen (1982) and Aiken and
Darbyshire (1990) has anthers 0.8 mm long and a leaf anatomy consistent with
F. brachyphylla. The specimen has been annotated to F. brachyphylla by S.G.
Aiken, and no other evidence for F. saximontana on Baffin Island has been
found in the course of extensive field work. (385) Tall specimens of F.
brachyphylla have been found around Iqaluit, Baffin Island. The voucher for
the record of F. saximontana mapped by Frederiksen (1982) and Aiken and
Darbyshire (1990) has anthers 0.8 mm long and a leaf anatomy consistent with
F. brachyphylla. The specimen has been annotated to F. brachyphylla by S.G.
Aiken, and no other evidence for F. saximontana on Baffin Island has been
found in the course of extensive field work. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: pofesa.


Hierochloë odorata <(L.) Beauvais>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Agrost. 62: 164. 1812. (10) Plants less
than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 13-60 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems,
or with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes
elongate, or compacted. (24) Rhizomes 0.2-2 mm wide. (25) Rhizome scales
smooth. (26) Rhizome scales 5-30 mm long. (27) Rhizome scales glabrous. (32)
Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems
glabrous. (37) Culm nodes becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes number visible
2-3. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the
margins fused only in the lower part. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 1.5-3
mm long. (77) Ligules membranous <minute hairs at apex visible at 40×>. (78)
Ligules hairy <minute trichomes>. (79) Ligules ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules
apices obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly
basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 1.2-21 cm long. (90) Leaves 0.7-2 mm
wide <when rolled, to 4 mm when flat>. (92) Leaf blades rolled in bud. (93)
Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or spreading from
the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially scabrous <scaberulous>, or hairy.
(112) Leaf blades abaxial surface scabrous <scaberulous>. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in
the leaf. (126) Leaf blades flat, or involute <rolling on drying>. (144) Flag
leaf sheaths not inflated. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence
<pyramidal>. (160) Inflorescence 2-8 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 15-40 mm
wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (165) Inflorescence primary
branches with spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence primary
branches 3.5-30 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary branches smooth. (185)
Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating above the glumes. (189)
Spikelets 3.5-5.5 mm long. (190) Spikelets 2.4-4 mm wide. (191) Florets per
spikelet 3 <terminal hermaphrodite, lower 2 staminate>. (212) First glume
0.8-0.95 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.8-0.9 ×
spikelet length. (214) First glume 3-5 mm long. (215) First glume ovate. (216)
First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1. (219) First glume apex acute.
(220) Second glume as long, or longer than the spikelet. (221) Second glume
almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222) Second glume
3.5-5.3 mm long. (224) Second glume glabrous. (225) Second glume veins 3.
(226) Rachilla internode 0.1 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode glabrous. (229)
Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla terminating in a
well-formed floret. (231) Callus differentiated, or not differentiated
<present at base of staminate florets, and near the base of hermaphrodite
florets>. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 2.7-3.7 mm
long. (236) Lemma lanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled. (239) Lemma surface shiny.
(240) Lemma hairy <as an apical tuft>. (242) Lemma veins 3-5. (243) Lemma apex
acute. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex ciliate <as an apical tuft;
and margins of staminate florets with conspicuous cilia>. (246) Lemma apex
awnless. (249) Palea well-developed <palea of staminate florets with 2 veins;
palea of fertile floret, 1 vein>. (250) Palea 2-3.2 mm long. (251) Palea with
hairy veins. (285) Anthers 1.7-2.4 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles
2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 2-2.5 mm long. (331)
Fruit indehiscent. (360) 2n = 28, 42, and 56 <2n = 28&42 Flora Europaea; 2n =
56, Bowden 1960b, 5 Canadian collections>. (373) Substrate type: halophytic.
(374) <Sandy meadows and lake shores.>. (380) Circumpolar, widespread. In
subarctic-alpine plants, staminate florets with or without a mucron. (384)
Porsild (1964) mapped the occurrence of this species on Victoria Island as the
only collection from the Arctic Archipelago. The record is not housed at the
Canadian Museum of Nature, and the occurrence of this taxon on the Arctic
Archipelago requires confirmation. (385) Porsild (1964) mapped the occurrence
of this species on Victoria Island as the only collection from the Arctic
Archipelago. The record is not at CAN. The data for that species have been
gathered and could readily be returned to the data base if this becomes
appropriate. (431) Code used for graphics files: pohiod.


Poa alpigena var. colpodea <(Th. Fr.) Schol.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Skrift. om Ishavet 62: 89 f. 421 V pl. 5.
1934. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
4-25 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants forming loose clusters.
(21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal
stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous <turf forming>. (32) Stems erect. (35) Stems
circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not
exposed. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with
the margins fused only in the lower part. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules
0.7-2.2 mm long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules
ovate-oblong. (80) Ligules apices obtuse. (81) Ligules entire. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves 0.7-6
cm long. (90) Leaves 0.9-1.3 mm wide <when folded>. (92) Leaf blades folded in
bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the stem, or
spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially hairy <sparsely
puberulent>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (119) Leaf blade
venation parallel. (120) Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in
the leaf. (121) Leaf blades bulliform cells in distinct rows on either side of
the midvein. (126) Leaf blades flat, or folded <more commonly>. (151)
Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence linear, or lanceolate. (160)
Inflorescence 1.6-5.5 cm long. (161) Inflorescence 5-20 mm wide. (162)
Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with
appressed secondary branches, or with spreading secondary branches. (166)
Inflorescence primary branches 2-16 mm long. (167) Inflorescence primary
branches smooth. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets disarticulating
above the glumes. (189) Spikelets 3.8-5.8 mm long. (190) Spikelets 1.6-3.5 mm
wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 2-3(-5). (212) First glume 0.85-0.9 × the
length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.45-0.55 × spikelet length.
(214) First glume 2.1-2.6 mm long. (215) First glume ovate. (216) First glume
glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1-3. (219) First glume apex acute. (220)
Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet. (221) Second glume almost as
long as, or longer than, the lowest floret <or barely as long>. (222) Second
glume 2.4-3 mm long. (223) Second glume ovate. (224) Second glume glabrous.
(225) Second glume veins 3. (226) Rachilla internode 0.5-0.9 mm long. (228)
Rachilla internode glabrous. (229) Rachilla not pronounced between the
florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond the uppermost floret. (231) Callus
differentiated <sparsely lanate>. (234) Callus hairs shorter than the floret.
(235) Lemma 2.7-3.8 mm long. (236) Lemma ovate, or lanceolate. (237) Lemma
keeled <slightly>. (239) Lemma surface dull. (240) Lemma hairy <on margins and
along keel, elsewhere glabrous>. (242) Lemma veins 5. (243) Lemma apex acute,
or rounded. (244) Lemma apex entire. (245) Lemma apex ciliate. (246) Lemma
apex awnless. (249) Palea well-developed. (250) Palea 2.5-3.2 mm long. (251)
Palea with scabrous veins. (285) Anthers 1.4-1.7 mm long. (296) Ovary
superior. (309) Styles 2. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (360) 2n = <unknown>. (373) Substrate type: halophytic. (384) =
Poa pratensis L. subsp. alpigena (Fr. ex Blytt) Hiitonen var. colpodea (Th.
Fr.) Soreng (Soreng 1991), included here under Poa pratensis subsp. alpigena.
One of the taxa currently being tested in a DNA study by L.J. Gillespie (CAN).
(385) = Poa pratensis L. subsp. alpigena (Fr. ex Blytt) Hiitonen var. colpodea
(Th. Fr.) Soreng (Soreng 1991), included here under Poa pratensis subsp.
alpigena. One of the taxa currently being tested in a DNA study by L.J.
Gillespie (CAN). (428) Data gathered from High Arctic samples filed under this
name, but not proliferous. (431) Code used for graphics files: popoco.


Poa arctica var. vivipara <Hook.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) Porsild (1964)
mapped nine records in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, but didn’t distinguish
them from subsp. caespitans. One of the taxa currently being tested in a DNA
study by L.J. Gillespie (CAN). (385) Porsild (1964) mapped nine records in the
Canadian Arctic Archipelago, but didn’t distinguish them from subsp.
caespitans. One of the taxa currently being tested in a DNA study by L.J.
Gillespie (CAN). (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for
graphics files: popovi.


Poa flexuosa <Sm.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) It has not been
possible to confirm the two records of this species that Porsild (1964) mapped
as occurring on Baffin Island, nor have any candidates for the taxon on the
Arctic Archipelago been found at CAN although looked for by R.J. Soreng and
S.G. Aiken, in 1990. (385) It has not been possible to confirm the two records
of this species that Porsild (1964) mapped as occurring on Baffin Island, nor
have any candidates for the taxon on the Arctic Archipelago been found at CAN
although looked for by R.J. Soreng and S.G. Aiken, in 1990. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: popofl.


Poa nascopieana <Polunin>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) Named for the
Hudson Bay Co. ship Nascopie. The original description was based on a single
collection from Baffin Island, Pangnirtung (BM) that had peculiar bracts
subtending the branches (Polunin 1940, plate II). This phenomenon he had
observed in specimens of doubtful affinity in Colorado. Porsild (1964) mapped
a second specimen from Baffin Island, Clyde Fiord) (CAN). R.J. Soreng in 1990
annotated the latter specimen to Poa glauca. He has suggested that the type
specimen may be abnormal possibly due to nematode infection (personal
communication 1996). (385) Named for the Hudson Bay Co. ship Nascopie. The
original description was based on a single collection from Baffin Island,
Pangnirtung (BM) that had peculiar bracts subtending the branches (Polunin
1940, plate II). This phenomenon he had observed in specimens of doubtful
affinity in Colorado. Porsild (1964) mapped a second specimen from Baffin
Island, Clyde Fiord) (CAN). R.J. Soreng in 1990 annotated the latter specimen
to Poa glauca. He has suggested that the type specimen may be abnormal
possibly due to nematode infection (personal communication 1996). (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: popona.


Puccinellia deschampsioides <T.J. Sorensen>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) Reported as a
single collection from Beechey Island by McJannet et al. (1993). The voucher
specimen at CAN was annotated to P. angustata by S.G. Aiken, April 1994. This
taxon may occur on the arctic islands, as it has been collected along the
coast on the neighboring continental Northwest Territories. (385) Reported as
a single collection from Beechey Island by McJannet et al. (1993). The voucher
specimen at CAN was annotated to P. angustata by S.G. Aiken, April 1994. This
taxon may occur on the arctic islands, as it has been collected along the
coast on the neighboring continental Northwest Territories, sometimes in
conspicuous, extensive stands in coastal areas. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: popude.


Puccinellia vaginata <(Lge.) Fernald and Weath.> var. paradoxa <Th. Sor.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) The single record
that Porsild (1964) mapped from Baffin Island, Lake Harbour requires
confirmation. (385) The single record that Porsild (1964) mapped from Baffin
Island, Lake Harbour requires confirmation. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: popupa.


Trisetum sibericum <Rupr.>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (4) Beitr. Pfl. Russ. Reich. 2: 65. 1845.
(10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 20-70
cm high <1.4 cm in Canada, 10 cm Europe <This doesn’t make sense.>>. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (21) Plants with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants
rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes compacted <? not often preserved; mentioned Porsild
and Cody 1980; not mentioned Flora Europaea>. (24) Rhizomes 0.6-1 mm wide.
(32) Stems erect. (35) Stems circular or oval in cross section. (36) Stems
glabrous. (37) Culm nodes not exposed, or becoming exposed. (38) Culm nodes
number visible 2-3. (39) Culm nodes not rooting at the lower nodes. (68)
Sheaths abruptly contracted into the blades. (72) Sheaths with the margins
fused only in the lower part. (75) Ligules present. (76) Ligules 0.9-1.8 mm
long. (77) Ligules membranous. (78) Ligules glabrous. (79) Ligules lanceolate.
(80) Ligules apices acute. (81) Ligules erose, or lacerate. (82) Leaves
marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate.
(89) Leaves 4-9 cm long. (90) Leaves 1-5 mm wide <when flat>. (92) Leaf blades
rolled in bud. (93) Leaf blades linear. (96) Leaf blades appressed to the
stem, or spreading from the vertical. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or
hairy <with sparse trichomes>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous, or
hairy <with sparse long trichomes>. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (120)
Leaf blades midvein similar in size to other veins in the leaf. (126) Leaf
blades flat, or involute. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (154) Inflorescence
lanceolate, or not applicable <pyramidal>. (160) Inflorescence 3-12 cm long.
(161) Inflorescence 10-30 mm wide. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous, or
hairy <sparsely>. (165) Inflorescence primary branches with appressed
secondary branches, or with spreading secondary branches. (166) Inflorescence
primary branches 4-22 mm long. (185) Spikelets pedicellate. (186) Spikelets
disarticulating above the glumes. (189) Spikelets 5.7-8.3 mm long. (190)
Spikelets 1.9-3.7 mm wide. (191) Florets per spikelet 3. (212) First glume
0.6-0.7 × the length of the second glume. (213) First glume 0.45-0.55 ×
spikelet length. (214) First glume 2.7-4.2 mm long. (215) First glume
lanceolate. (216) First glume glabrous. (217) First glume veins 1. (219) First
glume apex acuminate. (220) Second glume 0.4-0.9 × as long as the spikelet.
(221) Second glume almost as long as, or longer than, the lowest floret. (222)
Second glume 4.2-6.2 mm long. (223) Second glume lanceolate. (224) Second
glume glabrous, or with trichomes <on keel>. (225) Second glume veins 3. (226)
Rachilla internode 1.3-1.8 mm long. (228) Rachilla internode hairy. (229)
Rachilla not pronounced between the florets. (230) Rachilla extending beyond
the uppermost floret. (231) Callus differentiated <a few sparse hairs>. (234)
Callus hairs shorter than the floret. (235) Lemma 5-6.2 mm long. (236) Lemma
lanceolate. (237) Lemma keeled. (239) Lemma surface dull <with a sheen in
sunlight>. (240) Lemma glabrous, or sparsely scaberulous. (242) Lemma veins
3-5. (244) Lemma apex bifid. (245) Lemma apex not ciliate. (249) Palea
well-developed. (250) Palea 3.9-5.7 mm long. (251) Palea with scabrous veins.
(285) Anthers 2.3-3.5 mm long. (296) Ovary superior. (309) Styles 2. (317)
Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a caryopsis. (327) Fruit 4.5-5 mm long <caryopses rarely
found among North American specimens, even in mature, disarticulating
spikelets; data on caryopsis from Russian specimen CAN 134078>. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (360) 2n = 14 <Tzvelev 1976>. (373) Substrate type: halophytic.
(384) Not recorded from the Arctic Archipelago, but has been recorded in
nearby Yukon Territory. (385) Not recorded from the Arctic Archipelago, but
has been recorded in nearby Yukon Territory. (431) Code used for graphics
files: potrsi.


Trisetum spicatum var. maidenii <(Gand.) Fernald>

      (2) Poaceae, grass family. (68) Sheaths abruptly contracted into the
blades. (82) Leaves marcescent. (84) Leaves alternate. (384) (Porsild 1964).
Not maintained by Randall and Hilu (1986) who concluded that the data for 33
morphological characters revealed extreme variation within the species, and
that infraspecific taxa should not be recognized. (385) (Porsild 1964). Not
maintained by Randall and Hilu (1986) who concluded that the data for 33
morphological characters revealed extreme variation within the species, and
that infraspecific taxa should not be recognized. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: potrma.


Polemoniaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Polemonium family. (2) Polemoniaceae. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(387) Dahlgren's Superorder Solaniflorae. (398) Dahlgren's Order Solanales.
(406) Cronquist's Subclass Asteridae. (412) Cronquist's Order Solanales. (413)
Takhtajan's Subclass Asteridae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Laminae. (420)
Takhtajan's Order Polemoniales. (421) 300 species. (422) 18 genera. (423)
Genera in study region: Phlox, Polemonium. (424) Morphological data not coded.
(425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: pm.


Phlox richardsonii Hook. subsp. richardsonii

      (2) Polemoniaceae. (8) Phlox sibirica L. subsp. richardsonii (Hook.)
Hultén Phlox sibirica L. var. richardsonii (Hook.) Welsh. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (428) Possibly 5 western Arctic. (431) Code used for graphics
files: pmphri.


Phlox sibirica <L.> subsp. richardsonii <(Hook.) Hultén>

      (1) Richardson's phlox. (2) Polemoniaceae. (8) =Phlox richardsonii
subsp. richardsonii (Hook.) Hultén. (384) Name used by Jack Gillett - Porsild
had the taxon as a full species Phlox richardsonii. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: plphsi.


Polemonium boreale <M.F. Adams>

      (1) Jacob's Ladder. (2) Polemoniaceae. (8) Polelmonium boreale
subsp.richardsonii (Graham) J.P. Anders. Polelmonium boreale var.
villosissimun Hultén. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Possibly 10
western Arctic. (431) Code used for graphics files: plphsi.


Polygonaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Buckwheat family. (2) Polygonaceae, buckwheat family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Polygoniflorae. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Caryophyllidae. (409) Cronquist's Order Polygonales. (413)
Takhtajan's Subclass Caryophyllidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Caryophyllanae. (417) Takhtajan's Order Polygonales. (421) 800 species. (422)
45 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Koenigia, Oxyria, Polygonum, Rumex.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics
files: pl.


Koenigia islandica <L.>

      (2) Polygonaceae, buckwheat family. (424) Morphological data not coded.
(428) Possibly 20 records. (431) Code used for graphics files: plkois.


Oxyria digyna <(L.) Hill>

      (2) Polygonaceae, buckwheat family. (8) Rumex digyna L. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (428) Widespread with many records 50-100. (431)
Code used for graphics files: ploxdi.


Polygonum viviparum <L.>

      (2) Polygonaceae, buckwheat family. (8) Bistorta vivipara (L.) S.F. Gray
Polygonum fugas Small Polygonum macounii Small ex Macoun Polygonum viviparum
var. alpinum Wahlenb. Polypogonum viviparum var. macounii (Small ex Macoun)
Hultén. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Widespread with numerous
records 50-100. (431) Code used for graphics files: plpovi.


Rumex arcticus <Trautv.>

      (2) Polygonaceae, buckwheat family. (8) No synonymy for var. arcticus in
Kartesz (1994). (385) Porsild (1957) implied that this should be looked for in
the in Arctic Archipelago. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used
for graphics files: plruar.


Portulacaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Purslane family. (2) Portulaceae. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(387) Dahlgren's Superorder Caryophylliflorae. (390) Dahlgren's Order 1 1.
Caryophyllales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Caryophyllidae. (409) Cronquist's
Order Caryophyllales. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Caryophyllanae. (417)
Takhtajan's Order Caryophyllales. (421) 580 species. (422) 20 genera. (423)
Genera in study region: Montia. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425)
Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: pr.


Montia fontana <L.> subsp. fontana

      (1) Arctic purslane. (2) Portulaceae. (8) Claytonia fontana (L.) R.J.
Davis Montia dipetala Suksdorf Montia fontana subsp. amporitana auct. non
Sennen Montia fontana var. lamprosperma (Cham.) Fenzl Montia fontana var.
tenerrima (Gray) Fern & Wieg. Montia hallii (Gray) Greene Montia lamprosperma
Cham. (11) Plants 1-3.5 cm high <5 cm high in Arctic Island specimens, to 15
cm high in Alaskan collections>. (14) Plants annual herbs <small, pale-green
or yellowish, somewhat succulent>. (18) Taproot present <but roots poorly
developed>. (32) Stems erect, or prostrate <stems weak are becoming prostrate
when plants grow on soft substrates>. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles
absent <lower leaves, sometimes>, or present <usually>. (58) Petioles 0.1-2 mm
long. (84) Leaves opposite. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves (0.03-)0.5-1.5 cm
long. (90) Leaves 1.5-3 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades obovate. (97) Leaf blades
succulent <slightly>, or membranous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (125) Leaf
bases acute. (150) Inflorescence axillary <in pairs, often at the tips of the
stem, or on conspicuous petioles>. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in
diameter or length <inconspicuous>, or medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or
length <slightly>. (255) Sepals 2. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals green.
(259) Sepals glabrous. (266) Petals 3-5. (267) Petals fused <almost to the
base>. (268) Petals white, or yellow <pale, creamy>. (271) Petals 2-lobed
<sometimes rolling inwards to form tube-like structures, possibly when flower
is not fertilized>. (272) Petals 1-2 mm long. (277) Stamens 3-5. (278) Stamens
free. (280) Stamens fused to the corolla <at the base. Anthers approximately
0.2 mm long>. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (295) Carpels 3 <?family>. (296) Ovary
superior. (307) Styles present <short>. (308) Styles partially fused. (309)
Styles 3, or 5 <with each lobe forked>. (316) Placentation free central. (317)
Ovules 1. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit spherical. (327) Fruit 1-1.5 mm
long. (328) Fruit 0.8-1 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332)
Fruit black <in appearance, but the colour coming from the seeds. When ripe,
the fruit wall is membranous, easily split, and pale green>. (356) Seeds 1-3.
(357) Seeds 0.9-1.1 mm long. (358) Seeds black, or brown. (359) Seeds smooth
<but with rows of lenticular markings. Seeds characteristic of the family.
Embryo peripheral and more or less curved around a starchy centre>. (360) 2n =
<20, 8 counts in Löve and Löve, 1975 for M. lamprosperma>. (364) Circumpolar.
(371) Arctic Islands: Baffin and Victoria <This species is often tiny plants
and may be under collected>. (374) Clay, or sand <in wet springy places among
mosses, along brooks, or among tall sedges and grasses by the edge of stagnant
and muddy pools, less commonly in open places in wet sand or mud when stems
become prostrate and somewhat tufted>. (383) This species may be more wide
spread, and should be looked for at early Hudson Bay sites. (384) Susan
checked Porsild 1957, Hultén 1968, and Porsild and Cody 1980. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Caryophylliflorae. (390) Dahlgren's
Order 1 1. Caryophyllales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Caryophyllidae. (409)
Cronquist's Order Caryophyllales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Caryophyllidae.
(414) Takhtajan's Superorder Caryophyllanae. (417) Takhtajan's Order
Caryophyllales. (421) 150 species. (422) 20 genera. (423) Genera in study
region: Amphipetalum, Anacampseros, Baitaria, Calandrinia, Calyptridium,
Calyptrotheca, Ceraria, Cistanthe, Claytonia, Grahamia, Lenzia, Lewisia,
Montia, Portulaca, Rumicastrum, Schreiteria, Silvaea, Talinella, Talinopsis,
Talinum. Montia it the only representative of the family in the Arctic. (428)
5-10 Southern Baffin Island. (431) Code used for graphics files: prmofo.


Potamogetonaceae <Dumortier>

      (1) Pondweed family. (2) Potamogetonaceae, pondweed family. (213) First
glume 3 × spikelet length. (386) Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's
Superorder Alismatiflorae. (403) Dahlgren's Order 1 1. Zosterales. (421) 100
species. (422) 3 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Potamogeton. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: pt.


Coleogeton filiformis <(Pers.) D. Les & R. Haynes> subsp. alpinus <(Blytt) D.
Les & R. Haynes>

      (2) Potamogetonaceae, pondweed family. (8) Potamogeton filiformis Pers.
var. alpinus (Blytt) Aschers & Graebn. Potamogeton filiformis var. borealis
(Raf.) St. John. Hultén (1968). Potamogeton filiformis var. macounii Morong.
Hultén (1968) indicated that var. borealis taxon has a shorter, more compact
spike of greater length than the leaves, low growth, and seems to be merely a
growth form and apparently an adaption to Northern conditions. (11) Plants
(5-)10-30 cm high <or more in deep, clear, “warm” water>. (14) Plants
perennial herbs <totally submerged>. (15) Plants tufted <very like a fine
leaved grass when not in flower>. (17) Plants vegetatively proliferating by
bulbils <by rhizomes terminating in white tubers Porsild (1957)>. (18) Taproot
present. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short
horizontal stems. (22) Plants stoloniferous, or rhizomatous <if horizontal
stems become buried in soft mud>. (32) Stems erect <flaccid, jointed and
leafy>. (36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules present <attached at the base,
detached at the attenuate tips. Stipule-like sheath structures variable>. (54)
Stipules brown <pale>, or green. (55) Stipules scale-like or rudimentary <5-12
mm long>. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves distributed
along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate <all submerged in this species>. (87)
Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 25-100(-120) cm long. (90) Leaves 0.2-0.7 mm wide
<filiform>. (93) Leaf blades linear. (97) Leaf blades membranous. (105) Leaf
blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation parallel. (133) Leaf apices acute.
(135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145)
Flowering stem 2-6(-12) cm long. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence spicate <with 2-4 whorls of fowers>. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence 6-14. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length.
(196) Flowers actinomorphic. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free <one single
whorl of sepal-like tepals that are fleshy-firm, valvate and shortly clawed
(Cronquist 1981)>. (258) Sepals green <fleshy>. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261)
Sepals fleshy. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 4. (278) Stamens fused
<opposite the tepals and attached at the base. The tepals start growing before
the stamens and the two structures become united later in the growth. The
anthers are virtually sessile at the base of the carpels>. (293) Carpels
apocarpous. (295) Carpels 4 <alternating with the stamens>. (296) Ovary
superior. (307) Styles absent. (317) Ovules 1. (325) Fruit an achene. (326)
Fruit spherical <somewhat flattened>. (327) Fruit 1.8-2 mm long. (328) Fruit
1.6-1.8 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit black,
or brown <where seed shows through thin green fruit wall>. (333) Fruit
glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx persisting <but not attached to the fruit>. (356)
Seeds 1 <per carpel. Seed attached to the ventral margin of the carpel towards
the base>. (357) Seeds 3-4 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth <or
with a slight ridge and a few tubercles>. (360) 2n = <78, 5 counts, Löve and
Löve (1975) for P. filiformis>. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of
limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin <one record from Iqaluit, Southampton Island, Coral Harbour>.
(374) Aquatic <mud in shallow lakes and pools; only the inflorescence
emergent>. (383) ‘A good duck food’ (Fassett 1940). (384) Susan Checked
Porsild 1957, Hultén 1968, Porsild and Cody, 1980, Cronquist 1981 and Fassett
1940. (386) Subclass Monocotyledonae. (388) Dahlgren's Superorder
Alismatiflorae. (403) Dahlgren's Order 1 1. Zosterales. (421) 100 species.
(422) 3 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Groenlandia, Potamogeton,
Ruppia. (431) Code used for graphics files: ptcofi.


Primulaceae <Ventenat>

      (1) Primrose family. (2) Primulaceae. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(387) Dahlgren's Superorder Primuliflorae. (393) Dahlgren's Order 1 1.
Primulales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Primulales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Ericanae. (417) Takhtajan's Order Plumbaginales. (418) Takhtajan's
Order Primulales. (421) 100 species. (422) 20 genera. (423) Genera in study
region: Androsace, Primula. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425) Family.
(428) Fewer than 100 records. (431) Code used for graphics files: pr.


Androsace chamejasme <Host.> var. arctica < R. Knuth>

      (2) Primulaceae. (8) =Androsace chamaejasme Wulfen var. lehmanniana
Spreng. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics
files: pranch.


Androsace chamaejasme Wulfen var. lehmanniana Spreng.

      (2) Primulaceae. (8) Androsace chamejasme Host. var. arctica R. Knuth
Androsace lehmanniana Spreng. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code
used for graphics files: pranle.


Androsace septenrionalis <L.>

      (2) Primulaceae. (8) Kartesz (1994) indicates six subspecies for this
taxon. (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
pranse.


Primula borealis <Dubby>

      (2) Primulaceae. (7) Primula chamissonis E. Busch Primula kawasimae Hara
Primula parviflora Duby. (8) Var. borealis Primula chamissonis E. Busch
Primula kawasimae Hara Primula parviflora Duby Primula tenuis Small. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration. (431) Code
used for graphics files: prprbo.


Primula stricta <Hornem.>

      (2) Primulaceae. (8) No synonymy for this taxon in Kartesz (1994),.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
prprst.


Pyrolaceae <Dumortier>

      (1) Wintergreen family. (2) Pyrolaceae. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(387) Dahlgren's Superorder Corniflorae. (400) Dahlgren's Order 1 1. Ericales.
(406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Ericales.
(413) Takhtajan's Subclass Dilleniidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Ericanae.
(418) Takhtajan's Order Ericales. (421) 30 species. (422) 3 genera. (423)
Genera in study region: Pyrola. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425)
Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: py.


Pyrola grandiflora <Rad.>

      (2) Pyrolaceae. (8) Pyrola borealis Rydb. Pyrola canadensis Andres
Pyrola gormanii Rydb. Pyrola grandiflora var. canadensis (Andres) Porsild
Pyrola occidentalis R. Br. ex D. Don. (384) E. Haber considered this taxon to
be P. rotundifolia subsp. grandiflora. (424) Morphological data not coded.
(431) Code used for graphics files: pypygr.


Ranunculaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Buttercup family. (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (8) No
synonymy given for this variety in Kartesz (1994). (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's
Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's
Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (421) 1150
species. (422) 50 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Anemone, Caltha,
Coptis, Pulsatilla, Ranunculus. (424) Morphological data not coded. (425)
Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: rn.


Anemone multifida <Poir.> var. multifida

      (1) Cut-leaved anemone. (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (4) J.
Lamarck et al. Encycl., suppl. 1:364. 1810. (8) Anemone globosa Nutt. ex
Nels.; Anemone multifida var. hudsoniana DC Anemone multifida var. nowasadii
Boivin; Anemone multifida var, richardsoniana Fern.; Anemone multifida var.
sansonii Boivin Very different to Kartesz (1994). (9) Plants bisexual. (11)
Plants 25-30 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems
arising from a caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils.
(18) Taproot absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the leaves.
(36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58)
Petioles 60-130 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves in a basal
rosette. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves
compound. (89) Leaves 3-6 cm long. (90) Leaves 25-45 mm wide. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous. (98) Leaves trifoliate. (99) Leaflets 3. (107) Leaf blades
adaxially glabrous. (109) Leaf blades adaxial surface hairs sparse. (110) Leaf
blades upper surface white. (113) Leaf blades abaxial surface villous. (114)
Leaf blades abaxial hairs moderately dense. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface
hairs white. (119) Leaf blade venation palmate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127)
Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins without
hairs. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems without
leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 10-25 cm long. (146)
Inflorescence with involucral bracts. (147) Inflorescence involucral bract
resembling leaves. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (151) Inflorescence cymose. (162) Inflorescence main axis hairy.
(192) Flowers per inflorescence 2-4. (193) Flowers large, greater than 15 mm
in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual.
(196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 5-8. (256)
Sepals free. (257) Sepals 10-13 mm long. (258) Sepals of an unusual colour
<cream to red>. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent or
white. (261) Sepals petaloid. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals
absent. (277) Stamens 50-60. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all
equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (285) Anthers 1 mm long. (292) Receptacle 5 mm high. (293) Carpels
apocarpous. (295) Carpels 80. (299) Ovaries hairy. (300) Ovaries villous.
(301) Hairs dense. (302) White. (307) Styles present. (325) Fruit an achene.
(326) Fruit ellipsoid. (327) Fruit 2.5-2.75 mm long. (328) Fruit 1-1.5 mm
wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 12-21 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331)
Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit black. (333) Fruit hairy. (334) Fruit calyx not
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight.
(337) Persistent style 1 mm long. (356) Seeds 1. (360) 2n = 32. (361) FNA.
(362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels
recorded 2N-12N. (364) Not circumpolar, amphi-Atlantic, amphi-Beringian, or
North American <North and South America>. (365) Alpine. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Canada, or United States. (369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Man.,
or N.B., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Sask., or Yukon.
(370) USA: Alaska, or Calif., or Colo., or Idaho., or Maine, or Mich., or
Minn., or Mont., or Nev., or N.Mex., or N.York, or Oreg., or S. Dak., or Utah,
or Vt., or Wash., or Wyo. (374) Rocky sites. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's Order
Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's Order
Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (431) Code used
for graphics files: rnanmu.


Anemone parviflora <Michx.>

      (1) Northern anemone. (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (4) Fl.
Bor.-Amer. 1:319.1803. (8) Anemone borealis Richards. Anemone parviflora
Michx. var. grandiflora Ulbrich. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 5-15 cm
high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a
caudex. (18) Taproot absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the
leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles
present. (58) Petioles 20-55 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves in a
basal rosette. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87)
Leaves simple. (88) Leaves lobed. (89) Leaves 14-18 cm long. (90) Leaves 10-14
mm wide. (93) Leaf blades obovate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (107) Leaf
blades adaxially glabrescent. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrescent.
(114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface
hairs white. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade
venation pinnate. (125) Leaf bases cuneate. (126) Leaf blades flat, or
revolute <slightly>. (127) Leaf margins toothed. (128) Leaf margins crenate,
or serrate. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands all around leaf. (132)
Leaf margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices obtuse. (134) Conspicuous
hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems
hairy. (145) Flowering stem 2.5-6.5 cm long. (146) Inflorescence with
involucral bracts. (147) Inflorescence involucral bract resembling leaves.
(149) Flowers solitary. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (193) Flowers large,
greater than 15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk.
(195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present.
(255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 10-20 mm long. (258) Sepals of
an unusual colour <white with bluish tinge>. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals
hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals petaloid. (262) Sepals
non-accrescent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 60-70. (278) Stamens free.
(279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla.
(281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 1 mm long. (292) Receptacle
3-6 mm high. (293) Carpels apocarpous. (295) Carpels 60 <60-80>. (307) Styles
present. (325) Fruit an achene. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical. (327) Fruit
2-3 mm long. (328) Fruit 1-1.5 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 4-18 mm
long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit brown. (333) Fruit
hairy. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336)
Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style 1-2 mm long. (360) 2n = 16.
(361) FNA. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363)
Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic, or alpine.
(366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (368)
Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States. (369) Canada: Alta., or B.C.,
or Man., or N.B., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T.
(Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Colo., or
Idaho., or Mont., or Oreg., or Utah, or Wash., or Wyo. (371) Arctic Islands:
Banks, or Victoria. (373) Substrate type: calcareous, or peat. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's
Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's
Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428) 10
Western Arctic. (431) Code used for graphics files: rnanpr.


Anemone patens <L.> var. multifida <Pritzel>

      (1) Pasqueflower. (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (4) Linnaea 14:
581. 1841. (8) Anemone patens var. nuttalliana (DC) Gray Anemone patens var.
wolfgangiana (Bess.) Koch Pulsatilla patens (L.) Mill. subsp. asiatica Krylov
& Sergievskaja; Pulsatilla patens (L.) Mill. subsp. multifida (Pritzel)
Zamelis. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 2-25 cm high. (14) Plants perennial
herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a caudex. (18) Taproot absent.
(32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the leaves. (36) Stems densely
hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 50-170 mm
long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette. (84) Leaves
alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves
45-55 cm long. (90) Leaves 45-55 mm wide. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (98)
Leaves trifoliate. (99) Leaflets 3. (100) Leaflets 20-60 mm long. (101)
Leaflet 1-4 mm long. (102) Leaflets obovate. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface
dull. (108) Leaf blades upper surface villous. (109) Leaf blades adaxial
surface hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white. (113) Leaf blades
abaxial surface villous. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs moderately dense.
(115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple,
unbranched. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems without
leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence absent. (145) Flowering stem 5 cm long <-
16>. (146) Inflorescence with involucral bracts. (147) Inflorescence
involucral bract cut into linear divisions. (149) Flowers solitary. (150)
Inflorescence terminal. (193) Flowers large, greater than 15 mm in diameter or
length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 5-7. (256) Sepals free.
(257) Sepals 20-45 mm long. (258) Sepals purple, or blue. (259) Sepals hairy.
(260) Sepals hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals petaloid. (262)
Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 80. (278) Stamens
free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the
corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 1.1-1.8 mm long.
(292) Receptacle 3-5 mm high. (293) Carpels apocarpous. (295) Carpels 40.
(307) Styles present. (325) Fruit an achene. (326) Fruit ellipsoid, or
obovate. (327) Fruit 4-5 mm long. (328) Fruit 1 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length
in fruit 9-20 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit
brown. (333) Fruit hairy. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting <plumose>. (336) Persistent style straight. (337) Persistent style
23-38 mm long. (356) Seeds 1. (360) 2n = 16. (361) FNA. (362) Supposed basic
chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N.
(364) Circumpolar. (365) Boreal. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Rare. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States, or
Eurasia. (369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Man., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T.
(Mack.), or Ont., or Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Colo., or Idaho.,
or Minn., or Mont., or N.Mex., or S. Dak., or Utah, or Wyo. (371) Arctic
Islands: Banks, or Victoria. (374) Rocky sites. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's Order
Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's Order
Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (431) Code used
for graphics files: rnanpt.


Anemone richardsonii <Hook.>

      (1) Yellow anemone. (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (4) Fl.
Bor.-Amer. 1:6. 1829. (8) Anemone vahlii Hornem. (9) Plants bisexual. (11)
Plants 1-9 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed.
(17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent.
(21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous.
(23) Rhizomes elongate. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58)
Petioles 10-85 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves arising singly from
creeping rhizomes. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87)
Leaves simple. (88) Leaves lobed. (89) Leaves 1-3 cm long. (90) Leaves 15-45
mm wide. (93) Leaf blades circular, or reniform. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous.
(107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or glabrescent. (109) Leaf blades
adaxial surface hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white. (112)
Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrescent, or hairy. (113) Leaf blades abaxial
surface villous. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white. (118) Leaf
blades hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade venation palmate. (125) Leaf
bases cordate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins toothed. (128) Leaf
margins crenate, or serrate. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands all
around leaf. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute, or
obtuse. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems without
leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 8-12 cm long. (146)
Inflorescence with involucral bracts. (147) Inflorescence involucral bract
resembling leaves. (149) Flowers solitary. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (193)
Flowers large, greater than 15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne
on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals
present. (255) Sepals 6(-8). (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 8-15 mm long.
(258) Sepals yellow. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent
or white. (261) Sepals petaloid. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals
absent. (277) Stamens 30-40. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all
equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (285) Anthers 0.75 mm long. (292) Receptacle 4 mm high. (293)
Carpels apocarpous. (295) Carpels 30. (307) Styles present. (325) Fruit an
achene. (326) Fruit ovoid, or oblong. (327) Fruit 3-4 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5
mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 8-14 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331)
Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit brown. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx
not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style
straight. (337) Persistent style 3-6 mm long. (356) Seeds 1. (360) 2n = 14.
(361) FNA. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363)
Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (366)
Neither wide-ranging nor of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (368)
Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369)
Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T.
(Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska.
(373) Substrate type: acidic. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's
Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's Order Ranunculales. (406)
Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's Order Ranunculales. (413)
Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Ranunculanae.
(415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428) Victoria island only 5. (431) Code
used for graphics files: rnanri.


Caltha palustris <L.>

      (1) Cowslip. (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (4) Sp. Pl. 1:558.
1753. (8) Caltha arctica R. Br. Caltha asarifolia DC; C. palustris subsp.
arctica (R. Br.) Hultén Caltha palustris subsp. asarifolia (DC) Hulten; Caltha
palustris var. arctica (R. Br.) Huthén Caltha palustris var. asarifolia (DC)
Huthén Caltha palustris var. flabellifolia (Pursh) Torr. & Gray. (9) Plants
bisexual. (11) Plants 10-25 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
with many stems arising from a caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively
proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (19) Stem roots at nodes. (32)
Stems erect, or decumbent. (36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57)
Petioles present. (58) Petioles 14-170 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83)
Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 0.6-5.3
cm long. (90) Leaves 9-90 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades ovate, or circular, or
reniform. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface
shiny. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation palmate. (125)
Leaf bases cordate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128)
Leaf margins entire. (133) Leaf apices rounded. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes
absent. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (146) Inflorescence without involucral
bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence cymose. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (192) Flowers
per inflorescence 1-5. (193) Flowers large, greater than 15 mm in diameter or
length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (257)
Sepals 9-17 mm long. (258) Sepals yellow. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals
petaloid. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 70
<-90>. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (280)
Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers
1.2-2 mm long. (292) Receptacle 8 mm high. (293) Carpels apocarpous. (295)
Carpels 40. (307) Styles present. (310) Styles 1 mm long. (325) Fruit a
follicle. (326) Fruit ellipsoid. (327) Fruit 5-9 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5-4 mm
wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 3-5 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight.
(337) Persistent style 2 mm long. (356) Seeds 4-15. (357) Seeds 1.5-2 mm long.
(358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 32, or 56, or 60. (361) FNA.
(362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels
recorded 2N-12N. (364) Amphi-Atlantic and amphi-Beringian. (365) Boreal. (366)
Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (368) Northern
hemisphere: St. Pierre and Miquelon, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia.
(369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Man., or N.B., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.),
or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or N.S., or Ont., or P.E.I., or Que., or
Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Maine, or Mich., or Minn., or N.H., or
N.York, or Oreg., or S. Dak., or Vt., or Wash. (371) Arctic Islands: Parry
Islands, or Victoria. (374) Moist areas. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387)
Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's Order Ranunculales.
(406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's Order Ranunculales.
(413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428) Probably fewer than
10 western Arctic records. (431) Code used for graphics files: rncapa.


Coptis trifolia <(L.) Salisb.>

      (1) Goldthread. (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (4) Trans. Linn.
Soc., London 8:305. 1807. (8) Helleborus trifolius L. Coptis groenlandica
(Oeder) Fern. Coptis trifolia subsp. groenlandica (Oeder) Hult. (9) Plants
bisexual. (11) Plants 3-6 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
single-stemmed. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18)
Taproot absent. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous. (23) Rhizomes elongate. (52) Stipules absent. (57)
Petioles present. (58) Petioles 25-35 mm long. (82) Leaves evergreen. (83)
Leaves arising singly from creeping rhizomes. (84) Leaves alternate. (86)
Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves compound. (89) Leaves 0.8-1.4 cm long.
(90) Leaves 15-20 mm wide. (97) Leaf blades leathery. (98) Leaves trifoliate.
(99) Leaflets 3. (102) Leaflets obovate. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (134)
Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136)
Flowering stems glabrous. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with
the inflorescence absent. (145) Flowering stem 3-6 cm long. (146)
Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers solitary. (150)
Inflorescence axillary. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or
length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 5-7. (256) Sepals free.
(257) Sepals 4-7 mm long. (258) Sepals of an unusual colour <white>. (259)
Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals petaloid. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265)
Petals absent. (277) Stamens 30 <30-60>. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens
filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens
filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 0.2 mm long. (293) Carpels apocarpous. (295)
Carpels 4 <-7>. (307) Styles present. (325) Fruit a follicle. (326) Fruit
ellipsoid. (327) Fruit 4-7 mm long. (328) Fruit 1-2 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry.
(331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334)
Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent
style straight. (356) Seeds 3-5. (357) Seeds 1-1.5 mm long. (358) Seeds brown.
(359) Seeds smooth. (360) 2n = 18. (361) FNA. (362) Supposed basic chromosome
number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or boreal. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or St.
Pierre and Miquelon, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada:
Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or Man., or N.B., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or
N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.S., or Ont., or P.E.I., or Que., or Sask. (370) USA:
Alaska, or Maine, or Mich., or Minn., or N.H., or N.York, or Vt. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin. (374) Moist areas. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387)
Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's Order Ranunculales.
(406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's Order Ranunculales.
(413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428) 1 southern Baffin
record. (431) Code used for graphics files: rncotr.


Pulsatilla ludoviciana <(Nutt.) Heller>

      (1) Pasque-flower. (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (428) Porsild 1957 has single records from
Western Banks Island. Peter did not collect Data on this taxon. (431) Code
used for graphics files: rapulu.


Ranunculus allenii <Robins.>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by
Flora of North America project: Epirotes. (4) Rhodora 7:220. 1905. (8) No
synonymy in Kartesz (1994). (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 9-19 cm high.
(14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants in basal rosettes. (17) Plants not
vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (32) Stems erect.
(33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy.
(52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 50-80 mm long. (82)
Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves
heterophyllous <cauline leaves deeply divided into linear divisions>. (87)
Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 1.4-2.1 cm long. (90) Leaves
17-28 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades circular, or reniform. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades scabrous. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally
dense on both surfaces. (119) Leaf blade venation palmate. (125) Leaf bases
cordate, or truncate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins toothed.
(128) Leaf margins crenate. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands toward
apex only. (132) Leaf margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices rounded. (134)
Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136)
Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 2-11 cm long. (146) Inflorescence
without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers solitary. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194)
Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic.
(254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 4-6 mm
long. (258) Sepals yellow and brown. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair
colour translucent or white <pale yellow>. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262)
Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals
free. (268) Petals yellow. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270)
Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 4-5 mm long. (273) Petals
not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 20 <-30>. (278)
Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free
of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (292) Receptacle 3 mm high.
(293) Carpels apocarpous. (295) Carpels 60 <-80>. (307) Styles present. (325)
Fruit an achene. (326) Fruit obovate. (327) Fruit 1.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 1
mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 6 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331)
Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit
calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style
straight. (356) Seeds 1. (360) 2n = 32. (361) FNA. (362) Supposed basic
chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N.
(364) North American. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada. (369) Canada:
Lab., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or Que. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin. (374) Wet
meadows. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Ranunculanae. (415)
Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428) One southern Baffin record. (431) Code
used for graphics files: rnrnal.


Ranunculus cymbalaria <Pursh>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by
Flora of North America project: Halodes. (4) Fl. Amer. Sept. 2:392. 1814. (8)
Halerpestes cymbalaria (Pursh) Greene Ranunculus cymbalaria var. alpinus
Hooker Ranunculus cymbalaria var. saximontanus Fern. (9) Plants bisexual. (11)
Plants 1.5-2.5 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
single-stemmed. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18)
Taproot absent. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22)
Plants stoloniferous. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems shorter than the leaves.
(36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58)
Petioles 30 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette.
(84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple.
(88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 0.6-1.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 4-10 mm wide.
(93) Leaf blades oblong. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation palmate. (125) Leaf bases cordate, or
rounded. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire, or toothed. (128)
Leaf margins entire, or crenate. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands
toward apex only. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices rounded.
(134) Conspicuous hydathodes present. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145)
Flowering stem 1.2-1.7 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts.
(149) Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences <rarely>. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous <if applicable>. (192)
Flowers per inflorescence 1 <-2>. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in
diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual.
(196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 5. (256)
Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2.5-4 mm long. (258) Sepals purple. (259) Sepals
glabrous. (261) Sepals scarious. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals
present. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow. (269) Petals
without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed.
(272) Petals 3-5 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than
the calyx. (277) Stamens 25. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all
equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (292) Receptacle 7-12 mm high. (293) Carpels apocarpous. (295)
Carpels 30. (307) Styles present. (325) Fruit an achene. (326) Fruit obovate.
(327) Fruit 1.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 1 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit
2 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit green at
maturity. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit
styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (356) Seeds 1. (360) 2n =
16. (361) FNA. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13.
(363) Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or
boreal. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (368)
Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or St. Pierre and Miquelon, or Canada, or
United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or Man., or
N.B., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or N.S., or Ont., or
P.E.I., or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Ariz., or Calif.,
or Colo., or Idaho., or Maine, or Mich., or Minn., or Mont., or Nev., or N.H.,
or N.Mex., or N.York, or Oreg., or S. Dak., or Utah, or Wash., or Wyo. (371)
Arctic Islands: Victoria. (374) Aquatic, or wet meadows. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's
Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's
Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428) 1 record
Victoria Island. (431) Code used for graphics files: rnrngcy.


Ranunculus gmelinii <DC.>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by
Flora of North America project: Hecatonia. (4) Syst. Nat. 1:303. 1817. (8)
Ranunculus gmelinii subsp. purshii (Richards.) Hultén Ranunculus gmelinii var.
hookeri (D. Don) Benson Ranunculus gmelinii var. limosus (Nutt.) H. Hara
Ranunculus gmelinii var. prolificus (Fern.) H. Hara Ranunculus purshii
Richards. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 2 cm high. (14) Plants perennial
herbs. (15) Plants cushion-like. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by
bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (32) Stems prostrate. (36) Stems glabrous, or
sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 4-7
mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84)
Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88)
Leaves lobed. (89) Leaves 0.6-1.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 10-24 mm wide. (93)
Leaf blades circular, or reniform. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (107) Leaf
blades adaxially glabrescent. (113) Leaf blades abaxial surface pilose. (114)
Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs
white. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade venation
palmate. (125) Leaf bases cordate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins
entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133)
Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems
with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 1.2-1.8 cm
long. (149) Flowers solitary. (150) Inflorescence axillary. (193) Flowers
medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk.
(195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present.
(255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 2-5 mm long. (258) Sepals
yellow and brown. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent or
white. (261) Sepals scarious. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals
present. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow. (269) Petals
without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed.
(272) Petals 3-7 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than
the calyx. (277) Stamens 20. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all
equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (292) Receptacle 3 mm high. (293) Carpels apocarpous. (295) Carpels
15. (307) Styles present. (325) Fruit an achene. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327)
Fruit 1.5 mm long <-2>. (328) Fruit 1 mm wide <-1.25>. (330) Fruit dry. (331)
Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit
calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style
straight. (356) Seeds 1. (360) 2n = 16, or 32, or 64. (361) FNA. (362)
Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels
recorded 2N-12N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or boreal. (366) Of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Uncommon. (368) Northern hemisphere:
Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Man.,
or N.B., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.),
or N.S., or Ont., or P.E.I., or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska,
or Colo., or Idaho., or Maine, or Mich., or Minn., or Mont., or Nev., or
N.Mex., or Oreg., or Utah, or Wash., or Wyo. (371) Arctic Islands: Parry
Islands, or Banks, or Victoria. (374) Wet meadows, or moist areas <shallow
water or drying mud, swamps, marshes, ponds, shores of rivers>. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's
Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's
Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428) Few
western arctic records. (431) Code used for graphics files: rnrngm.


Ranunculus hyperboreus <Rottb.>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by
Flora of North America project: Hecatonia. (4) Skr. Kiobenhavnske Selsk.
Laerd. Elsk. 10:458. 1770. (8) Ranunculus hyperboreus subsp. arnellii Scheutz;
R. hyperboreus subsp. intertextus (Greene) Kapoor & Love; R. hyperboreus var.
samojedorum (Rupr.) Perfiljev; R. hyperboreus var. tricrenatus Rupr.; R.
hyperboreus var. turquetilianus Polunin; R. natans C.A. Mey. var. intertextus
(Greene) Benson. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 1.2-2 cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants matted. (17) Plants not vegetatively
proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (32) Stems prostrate. (33)
Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules
absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 10 mm long. (82) Leaves
deciduous. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate.
(86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves lobed. (89)
Leaves 0.4-0.7 cm long. (90) Leaves 8-12 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades reniform.
(97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade
venation palmate. (125) Leaf bases cordate, or obtuse. (126) Leaf blades flat.
(127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins with
hairs. (133) Leaf apices rounded. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present. (135)
Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (138) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence absent. (145)
Flowering stem 4 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149)
Flowers solitary. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (193) Flowers small, less than
5 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers
bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 5.
(256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 3-4 mm long. (258) Sepals yellow and brown.
(259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals scarious. (262) Sepals non-accrescent.
(265) Petals present. (266) Petals 3, or 4, or 5. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals yellow. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals
obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 4-5 mm long. (273) Petals not
spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens
free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the
corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (292) Receptacle 2 mm high. (293)
Carpels apocarpous. (295) Carpels 15-20. (307) Styles present. (325) Fruit an
achene. (326) Fruit obovate. (327) Fruit 1.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 1 mm wide.
(329) Peduncle length in fruit 4 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx
not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style
straight. (356) Seeds 1. (360) 2n = 32. (361) FNA,Porsild 442 - CAN 303446.
(362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels
recorded 2N-12N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366)
Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere:
Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: Alta., or
B.C., or Lab., or Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or
N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or
Colo., or Idaho., or Mont., or Nev., or Utah, or Wyo. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or
Banks, or Victoria, or Somerset, or King William. (374) Aquatic, or moist
areas <mud on stream margins, marshes>. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387)
Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's Order Ranunculales.
(406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's Order Ranunculales.
(413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428) Widespread with
numerous records. Possibly 50-70. (431) Code used for graphics files: rnrnhy.


Ranunculus lapponicus <L.>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by
Flora of North America project: Coptidium. (4) Sp. Pl. 1:553. 1753. (8)
Coptidium alpponicum (L.) Gandog. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 5-7 cm
high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants matted. (17) Plants not
vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (19) Nodal
rooting. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22) Plants
rhizomatous. (36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present.
(58) Petioles 45-55 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves arising singly
from creeping rhizomes. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous.
(87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves lobed. (89) Leaves 14-20 cm long. (90) Leaves
30-33 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades reniform. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105)
Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation palmate. (125) Leaf bases
cordate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins toothed. (128) Leaf
margins crenate. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands toward apex only.
(132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices rounded. (134) Conspicuous
hydathodes present. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering
stems glabrous. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the
inflorescence absent. (145) Flowering stem 10-15 cm long. (149) Flowers
solitary. (150) Inflorescence axillary. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in
diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual.
(196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 3. (256)
Sepals free. (257) Sepals 4-7 mm long. (258) Sepals yellow and brown. (259)
Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals scarious. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265)
Petals present. (266) Petals 5-8. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow.
(269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals
unlobed. (272) Petals 5-6 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals same
length as the calyx. (277) Stamens 20. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens
filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens
filaments glabrous. (292) Receptacle 5-7 mm high. (293) Carpels apocarpous.
(295) Carpels 12. (307) Styles present. (325) Fruit an achene. (326) Fruit
ovoid. (327) Fruit 4-5 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-2.2 mm wide. (329) Peduncle
length in fruit 17 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332)
Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335)
Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (356) Seeds 1. (360)
2n = 16. (361) FNA. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13.
(363) Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or
boreal. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (368)
Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369)
Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or Man., or N.B., or Nfld., or N.W.T.
(Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Sask., or
Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Maine, or Mich., or Minn. (371) Arctic Islands:
Baffin. (374) Moist areas <bogs, muskeg, lakesides>. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's
Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's
Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428) Perhaps
10 records Southern Baffin Island. (431) Code used for graphics files: rnrnla.


Ranunculus nivalis <L.>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by
Flora of North America project: Epirotes. (4) Sp. Pl. 1:553. 1753. (8) No
synonymy in Kartesz (1994). (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 5-19 cm high.
(14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising from a
caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot
absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves.
(36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58)
Petioles 12-45 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette.
(84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple.
(89) Leaves 0.9-1.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 12-26 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
reniform. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (125) Leaf
bases cordate, or truncate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins
toothed. (128) Leaf margins crenate. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands
toward apex only. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices rounded.
(134) Conspicuous hydathodes present. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (145)
Flowering stem 2-13 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts.
(149) Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences <rarely>. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 1 <-2>. (193) Flowers large, greater
than 15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195)
Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255)
Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 6-8 mm long. (258) Sepals green.
(259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour brown. (261) Sepals herbaceous.
(262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 5. (267)
Petals free. (268) Petals yellow. (269) Petals without contrasting markings.
(270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 9-12 mm long. (273)
Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 20.
(278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens
free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (285) Anthers 1 mm
long. (292) Receptacle 9 mm high <glabrous>. (293) Carpels apocarpous. (295)
Carpels 80. (307) Styles present. (325) Fruit an achene. (326) Fruit obovate.
(327) Fruit 2-2.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.2-1.7 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length
in fruit 5-9 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit
green at maturity. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting.
(335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (360) 2n = 48.
(361) FNA. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363)
Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or alpine.
(366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada:
Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Que., or
Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or
Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or
Victoria, or Prince of Wales, or Somerset. (374) Snow beds, or rocky sites.
(386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae.
(389) Dahlgren's Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae.
(407) Cronquist's Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae.
(414) Takhtajan's Superorder Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order
Ranunculales. (428) Widespread possibly 30 records. (431) Code used for
graphics files: rnrnni.


Ranunculus pallasii <Schlecht.>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by
Flora of North America project: Pallasiantha. (4) Animadv. Bot. Ranunc. Cand.
1:15. 1819. (8) No synonymy in Kartesz (1994). (9) Plants bisexual. (11)
Plants 10-15 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants matted. (17)
Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (19)
Rooting at nodes. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous. (32) Stems decumbent. (33) Stems shorter than the leaves.
(36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58)
Petioles 70-75 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves arising singly from
creeping rhizomes. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87)
Leaves simple. (88) Leaves lobed, or not lobed. (89) Leaves 2-4.2 cm long.
(90) Leaves 8-25 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear, or obovate. (97) Leaf
blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
trinerved. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf
margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins without hairs.
(133) Leaf apices acuminate, or rounded. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145)
Flowering stem 7-9 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts.
(149) Flowers solitary. (150) Inflorescence axillary. (193) Flowers large,
greater than 15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk.
(195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present.
(255) Sepals 3. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 9-10 mm long. (258) Sepals
purple. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals scarious. (262) Sepals
non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 7-9. (267) Petals free.
(268) Petals white, or pink. (269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270)
Petals oblanceolate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 10-12 mm long. (273)
Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 30.
(278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens
free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (292) Receptacle 4 mm
high. (293) Carpels apocarpous. (295) Carpels 50-60. (307) Styles present.
(325) Fruit an achene. (326) Fruit ovoid. (327) Fruit 3.5-5 mm long. (328)
Fruit 2.5-3 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 8-11 mm long. (330) Fruit
dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit glabrous.
(334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336)
Persistent style straight. (356) Seeds 1. (360) 2n = 32. (361) FNA. (362)
Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels
recorded 2N-12N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of limited
distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (368) Northern hemisphere:
Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: Lab., or Man., or N.W.T.
(Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Yukon.
(370) USA: Alaska. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin. (373) Substrate type: acidic.
(374) Aquatic. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Ranunculanae. (415)
Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428) 2 records southern Baffin. (431) Code
used for graphics files: rnrnpa.


Ranunculus pedatifidus <Sm.> var. affinis <(R. Br.) Benson>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by
Flora of North America project: Epirotes. (4) Amer. Midl. Naturalist 52:355.
1954. (8) Ranunculus affinis R. Br. Ranunculus eastwoodianus Benson Ranunculus
pedatifidus subsp. affinis (R. Br.) Hultén. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants
8-30 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising
from a caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18)
Taproot absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the
leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles
present. (58) Petioles 22-35 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves
mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves heterophyllous. (87) Leaves
simple. (88) Leaves lobed. (89) Leaves 0.8-1.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 12-20 mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades ovate, or reniform. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105)
Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both
surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade
venation palmate. (125) Leaf bases cordate, or truncate. (126) Leaf blades
flat. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins
without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present.
(135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (145)
Flowering stem 12-15 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts.
(149) Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal.
(151) Inflorescence cymose. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 1, or 2. (193)
Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a
stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals
present. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 5-6 mm long. (258)
Sepals green and purple. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour
translucent or white. (261) Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent.
(265) Petals present. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow.
(269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals
unlobed. (272) Petals 7-8 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals
longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 20. (278) Stamens fused. (279) Stamens
filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens
filaments glabrous. (292) Receptacle 5 mm high. (293) Carpels apocarpous.
(295) Carpels 80 <-100>. (307) Styles present. (325) Fruit an achene. (326)
Fruit obovate. (327) Fruit 2.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 2 mm wide. (329) Peduncle
length in fruit 5-5.5 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332)
Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit glabrous, or hairy. (334) Fruit calyx not
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight.
(356) Seeds 1. (360) 2n = 32, or 48. (361) FNA. (362) Supposed basic
chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N.
(364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Uncommon. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or
United States. (369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or Man., or Nfld., or
N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or
Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Ariz., or Colo., or Mont., or Utah, or
Wyo. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry
Islands, or Banks, or Victoria. (374) Wet meadows, or rocky sites. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389)
Dahlgren's Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407)
Cronquist's Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales.
(431) Code used for graphics files: rnrnpf.


Ranunculus pedatifidus <Sm.> var. pedatifidus

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (362) Supposed basic chromosome
number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N. (384) Name
used by Jack Gillett. Variety pedatifidus is considered as asian variety.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
rnrnpd.


Ranunculus pedatifidus <Sm.> var. leiocarpus <(Trautv.) Fern.>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (362) Supposed basic chromosome
number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N. (384) Name
used by Jack Gillett. Variety leiocarpus refers to glabrous specimens, but has
been reduced to synonymy with subsp. affinis because the character is
variable. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Porsild mapped approx. 15
widespread records for this name. (431) Code used for graphics files: rnrnle.


Ranunculus pygmaeus <Wahlenb.>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by
Flora of North America project: Epirotes. (4) Fl. Lapp., 157. 1812. (8)
Ranunculus pygmaeus var. langeana Nathorst. (9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants
5-14 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants with many stems arising
from a caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18)
Taproot absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the
leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (43) Branches <Approx 15 widespread
records>. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 20-27 mm
long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate.
(86) Leaves heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves lobed. (89) Leaves
0.5-1 cm long. (90) Leaves 8-13 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades reniform. (97) Leaf
blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
palmate. (125) Leaf bases cordate, or truncate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127)
Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins with hairs.
(133) Leaf apices obtuse, or rounded. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present.
(136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 5-8 cm long. (146)
Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers solitary, or in
inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence cymose.
(192) Flowers per inflorescence 1, or 2. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm
in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual.
(196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 5. (256)
Sepals free. (257) Sepals 3-5 mm long. (258) Sepals yellow and brown. (259)
Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour translucent or white. (261) Sepals
scarious. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present. (266) Petals 5.
(267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow. (269) Petals without contrasting
markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 2.5-4 mm
long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (277)
Stamens 20. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length.
(280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (292)
Receptacle 5 mm high. (293) Carpels apocarpous. (295) Carpels 50. (307) Styles
present. (325) Fruit an achene. (326) Fruit obovate. (327) Fruit 1 mm long.
(328) Fruit 0.8-1 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332)
Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335)
Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (356) Seeds 1. (360)
2n = 16. (361) FNA. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13.
(363) Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or
alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia <Spitsbergen>.
(369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.),
or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Que., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Colo., or Idaho.,
or Mont., or Utah, or Wyo. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or
Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or
Victoria, or Prince of Wales, or Somerset, or King William. (374) Wet meadows,
or snow beds. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder
Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Ranunculanae. (415)
Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (431) Code used for graphics files: rnrnpy.


Ranunculus sabinei <R. Br.>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by
Flora of North America project: Epirotes. (4) J. Voy. N.-W. Passage, Bot.,
264. 1824. (8) Ranunculus pygmaeus Wahlenb. subsp. sabinei (R. Br.) Hultén.
(9) Plants bisexual. (11) Plants 1.5-11 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs.
(15) Plants with many stems arising from a caudex. (17) Plants not
vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (32) Stems erect,
or decumbent. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems
sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles
26-32 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves
alternate. (86) Leaves heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves lobed.
(89) Leaves 15-22 cm long. (90) Leaves 14-19 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
obovate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous.
(113) Leaf blades abaxial surface villous. (119) Leaf blade venation palmate.
(125) Leaf bases obtuse. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire.
(128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices
obtuse, or rounded. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present. (135) Flowering
stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 4.5-6 cm
long. (149) Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (151) Inflorescence cymose. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 1-3.
(193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne
on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals
present. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 4.5-6 mm long. (258)
Sepals yellow and purple. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour
translucent or white. (261) Sepals scarious. (262) Sepals non-accrescent.
(265) Petals present. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow.
(269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals
unlobed. (272) Petals 4.5-6 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals
longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 30. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens
filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens
filaments glabrous. (292) Receptacle 6-8 mm high. (293) Carpels apocarpous.
(295) Carpels 50 <-60>. (307) Styles present. (325) Fruit an achene. (326)
Fruit obovate. (327) Fruit 1.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 1 mm wide. (329) Peduncle
length in fruit 6 mm long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332)
Fruit purple. (333) Fruit hairy. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit
styles persisting. (336) Persistent style straight. (360) 2n = 64. (361) FNA.
(362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels
recorded 2N-12N. (364) North American. (365) High arctic. (366) Wide-ranging
in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or
Canada, or United States. (369) Canada: N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or
N.W.T. (Mack.), or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or
Devon, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg, or Parry Islands, or Banks, or Victoria,
or Prince of Wales, or King William. (374) Rocky sites. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's
Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's
Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428) Ca. 10
records western Arctic. (431) Code used for graphics files: rnrnsb.


Ranunculus subrigidus <W.B. Drew>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (424) Morphological data not coded.
(428) Ecord from island in the Fox Basin. (431) Code used for graphics files:
rarasb.


Ranunculus sulphureus <Sol.>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by
Flora of North America project: Epirotes. (4) C.J. Phipps, Voy. North Pole,
202. 1774. (8) Ranunculus sulphureus var. intercedens Hultén. (9) Plants
bisexual. (11) Plants 5-20 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
with many stems arising from a caudex. (17) Plants not vegetatively
proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems
conspicuously taller than the leaves. (36) Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy.
(52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58) Petioles 10-90 mm long. (82)
Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves
heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves lobed. (89) Leaves 0.7-3 cm
long. (90) Leaves 9-31 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades elliptic, or circular. (97)
Leaf blades herbaceous. (108) Leaf blades upper surface villous. (109) Leaf
blades adaxial surface hairs sparse. (113) Leaf blades abaxial surface
villous. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse. (115) Leaf blades abaxial
surface hairs white. (118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf
blade venation palmate. (125) Leaf bases truncate, or obtuse. (126) Leaf
blades flat. (127) Leaf margins toothed. (128) Leaf margins crenate. (129)
Leaf margins with teeth or glands toward base only. (132) Leaf margins without
hairs. (133) Leaf apices obtuse, or rounded. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes
absent. (135) Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy. (145)
Flowering stem 12-15 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts.
(149) Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal.
(151) Inflorescence cymose. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 1-3. (193) Flowers
large, greater than 15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a
stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254) Sepals
present. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 8-13 mm long. (258)
Sepals yellow and brown. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour brown.
(261) Sepals scarious. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals present.
(266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow. (269) Petals without
contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals
6-15 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals longer than the calyx.
(277) Stamens 25. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in
length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous.
(292) Receptacle 6-8 mm high. (293) Carpels apocarpous. (295) Carpels 70.
(307) Styles present. (325) Fruit an achene. (326) Fruit obovate. (327) Fruit
1.5-2.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.4-1.8 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
indehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish. (333) Fruit glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx
not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (336) Persistent style
straight. (356) Seeds 1. (360) 2n = 42, or 80, or 84, or 96, or 98. (361) FNA.
(362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels
recorded 2N-12N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) High arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in
the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or
Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: B.C., or Lab., or N.W.T.
(Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Que., or Yukon. (370) USA:
Alaska. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, or Devon, or Ellesmere, or Axel Heiberg,
or Parry Islands, or Cornwallis, or Banks, or Victoria, or Prince of Wales, or
Somerset, or King William. (374) Wet meadows, or snow beds. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's
Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's
Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's
Superorder Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428)
Widespread possibly 30 records. (431) Code used for graphics files: rnrnsu.


Ranunculus tricholphjyullus <Chaix> var. eradicatus <(Laest.) W. B. Drew>

      (1) White water buttercup. (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (428) Possilby 10 Eastern Arctic. (431) Code
used for graphics files: Raratr.


Ranunculus turneri <Greene>

      (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3) Nomenclatural section used by
Flora of North America project: Ranunculus. (4) Pittonia 2:296. 1892. (8)
Ranunculus occidentalis Nuttall var. turneri (Greene) Benson. (9) Plants
bisexual. (11) Plants 2-21 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
single-stemmed. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18)
Taproot absent. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the
leaves. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles
present. (58) Petioles 50-55 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves
mostly basal. (84) Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves heterophyllous. (87) Leaves
simple. (88) Leaves lobed. (89) Leaves 1.5-2.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 20-40 mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades reniform. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf
blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally dense on both surfaces.
(118) Leaf blades hairs simple, unbranched. (119) Leaf blade venation palmate.
(125) Leaf bases obtuse. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire.
(128) Leaf margins entire. (132) Leaf margins with hairs. (133) Leaf apices
acute. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present. (136) Flowering stems hairy.
(145) Flowering stem 18-22 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral
bracts. (149) Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence
terminal. (151) Inflorescence cymose. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 1-3.
(193) Flowers large, greater than 15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers
borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254)
Sepals present. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (257) Sepals 7-9 mm long.
(258) Sepals yellow and brown. (259) Sepals hairy. (260) Sepals hair colour
translucent or white. (261) Sepals scarious. (262) Sepals non-accrescent.
(265) Petals present. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow.
(269) Petals without contrasting markings. (270) Petals obovate. (271) Petals
unlobed. (272) Petals 14-18 mm long. (273) Petals not spurred. (274) Petals
longer than the calyx. (277) Stamens 80. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens
filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens
filaments glabrous. (292) Receptacle 14 mm high. (293) Carpels apocarpous.
(295) Carpels 40-50. (307) Styles present. (325) Fruit an achene. (326) Fruit
obovate. (327) Fruit 2-3 mm long. (328) Fruit 1.5-2 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry.
(331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit yellowish and brown. (333) Fruit glabrous.
(334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles not persistent. (336)
Persistent style straight. (362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family
7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 2N-12N. (364) Amphi-Beringian. (365)
Low arctic. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States, or Eurasia.
(369) Canada: Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387)
Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389) Dahlgren's Order Ranunculales.
(406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407) Cronquist's Order Ranunculales.
(413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales. (428) Not recorded in
Posrild 1957. (431) Code used for graphics files: rnrntu.


Thalictrum alpinum <L.>

      (1) Arctic meadow-rue. (2) Ranunculaceae, buttercup family. (3)
Nomenclatural section used by Flora of North America project: Thalictrum. (4)
Sp. Pl. 1:545. 1753. (8) Thalictrum alpinum var. hebetum Boivin. (9) Plants
bisexual. (11) Plants 8-20 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants
single-stemmed. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18)
Taproot absent. (21) Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous. (32) Stems erect. (33) Stems conspicuously taller than the
leaves. (36) Stems glabrous. (52) Stipules absent. (57) Petioles present. (58)
Petioles 10-65 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84)
Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves compound. (89)
Leaves 1.2-3 cm long. (90) Leaves 20-35 mm wide. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous.
(98) Leaves pinnate, or decompound. (99) Leaflets 5-8. (100) Leaflets 3-9 mm
long. (101) Leaflet 5 mm long. (102) Leaflets ovate. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (135) Flowering stems with
leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (138) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence present. (139) Leaf or reduced bract closely
associated with the inflorescence much reduced, or scale-like. (141) Leaf or
reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence 2.5 cm long. (143)
Leaf or reduced bract closely associated with the inflorescence persistent.
(145) Flowering stem 4.5-16 cm long. (146) Inflorescence without involucral
bracts. (149) Flowers in inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal. (151)
Inflorescence racemose. (162) Inflorescence main axis glabrous. (192) Flowers
per inflorescence 9-15. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or
length. (194) Flowers borne on a stalk. (195) Flowers bisexual. (196) Flowers
actinomorphic. (254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4-5. (256) Sepals free.
(257) Sepals 1.5-3 mm long. (258) Sepals purple. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261)
Sepals herbaceous. (262) Sepals non-accrescent. (265) Petals absent. (277)
Stamens 8-11. (278) Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length.
(280) Stamens free of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (285)
Anthers 2 mm long. (293) Carpels apocarpous. (295) Carpels 2 <-6>. (307)
Styles absent. (325) Fruit an achene. (326) Fruit obovate. (327) Fruit 1.5-3
mm long. (328) Fruit 0.7-1 mm wide. (329) Peduncle length in fruit 4.5-14 mm
long. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit indehiscent. (332) Fruit black. (333) Fruit
glabrous. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (360) 2n = 14, or 21. (361) FNA.
(362) Supposed basic chromosome number of family 7&8&9&13. (363) Ploidy levels
recorded 2N-12N. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Low arctic, or alpine. (366) Neither
wide-ranging nor of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada:
B.C., or Lab., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Que., or Yukon. (370) USA:
Alaska, or Calif., or Colo., or Idaho., or Mont., or Nev., or N.Mex., or
Oreg., or Utah, or Wyo. (373) Substrate type: acidic. (374) Wet meadows. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Ranunculiflorae. (389)
Dahlgren's Order Ranunculales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Magnoliidae. (407)
Cronquist's Order Ranunculales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Ranunculidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Ranunculanae. (415) Takhtajan's Order Ranunculales.
(428) In Porsild (1957) as possibly in the CAA but no records mapped. (431)
Code used for graphics files: rnthal.


Rosaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Rose family. (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order
Rosales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Rosidae. (411) Cronquist's Order Rosales.
(413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae.
(419) Takhtajan's Order Rosales. (421) 2000 species. (422) 100 genera. (423)
Genera in study region: Dryas, Geum, Potentilla, Rubus, Sibbaldia. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics
files: ro.


Dryas integrifolia <L.>

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (8) Subsp. integrifolia var.canescens Simm.
Dryas octopetala L. var.inergrifolia (Vahl) Hook. f. (424) Morphological data
not coded. (428) Very widespread with over 100 records. (431) Code used for
graphics files: rodrin.


Dryas octopetala L. subsp. punctata (Jus.) Hultén var. viscida Hultén

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (8) Dryas punctata Juz. (424) Morphological
data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: rodroc.


Dryas punctata <Juz.>

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (8) =Dryas octopetala L. subsp. punctata
(Jus.) Hultén var. viscida Hultén. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426)
Status under consideration. (428) 3 records in Western Arctic. (431) Code used
for graphics files: rodrpu.


Geum rossii <(R. Br.) Sér.>

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (8) Var. rossii Acomastylis rossii (R. Br.)
Greene. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Status under consideration.
(428) Few records in high Arctic. (431) Code used for graphics files: rogero.


Potentilla crantzii <(Crantz G. Beck ex Fritsch>

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (8) =?Potentilla tabernaemontani Aschers.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (428) One record southern Baffin. (431)
Code used for graphics files: ropocr.


Potentilla egedii <Wormskj.> var. groenlandica (Tratt.) Polunin

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (8) =?Argentina egedii Wormsk subsp. egedii.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Approx. 5 records southern Arctic.
(431) Code used for graphics files: ropoeg.


Potentilla hyparctica <Malte>

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (8) ?=Potenilla nana Willd. ex Schlecht.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Widespread possibly 40 records.
(431) Code used for graphics files: ropohy.


Potentilla nivea <L.>

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (8) Var. nivea L. Potentilla nivea subsp.
fallax Porsild Potentilla nivea var. tomentosa Nilss.-Ehle. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (428) Porsill recognized three varieties.
Possibly 30 records. (431) Code used for graphics files: roponi.


Potentilla pulchella <Pursh>

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (8) Potentilla nivea L. var. pulchella (R.
Br.) Dur. Potentilla usticapensis Fern. (424) Morphological data not coded.
(428) Widespread with numerous records. Possibly 40. (431) Code used for
graphics files: ropopu.


Potentilla rubricaulis <Lehm.>

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (8) Potentilla rubricaulis var. dasyphylla
Ledeb. Potentilla rubicaulis var. pedersenii Rydb. Potentilla saximontana
Rydb. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428) 20-30 records. (431) Code used
for graphics files: roporu.


Potentilla vahliana <Lehm.>

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428)
Possibly 20. (431) Code used for graphics files: ropova.


Rubus chamaemorus <L.>

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (8) No synonymy in Kartesz (1994),. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (428) Fewer than 5 southern Arctic. (431) Code
used for graphics files: roruch.


Sibbaldia procumbens <L.>

      (2) Rosaceae, rose family. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428) One
record from Iqaluit. (431) Code used for graphics files: rosipr.


Salicaceae <Mirbel>

      (1) Willow family. (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (9) Plants dioecious.
(10) Plants less than 15 cm high <8>, or more than 15 cm high <9>. (11) Plants
0.5-100.5-650 cm high. (12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants dwarf shrubs <6>, or
low shrubs <8>, or mid shrubs <8>, or tall shrubs <6>, or trees <1>. (16)
Plants not colonial <10>, or forming colonies by layering <4>, or forming
rhizomatous mats <2>. (17) Plants not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils.
(18) Taproot absent. (32) Stems erect <12>, or decumbent <6>, or prostrate
<5>. (34) Stems not filiform. (39) Culm nodes not rooting at the lower nodes.
(40) Branches yellowish <1>, or gray-brown <4>, or red-brown, or violet <2>,
or yellow-brown <9>, or brownish <5>. (41) Branches not glaucous <14>, or
thinly glaucous <4>, or thickly glaucous <2>. (42) Branches glabrous <14>, or
glabrescent <9>, or hairy <8>. (43) Branches pilose <1/8>, or villous <7/8>,
or tomentose <1/8>, or woolly <1/8>, or long-silky <1/8>. (44) Branches
epidermis not flaky <8>, or flaky <8>. (45) Branchlets yellow-green <3>, or
yellow-brown <10>, or gray-brown <2>, or red-brown <11>, or violet <2>, or
brownish <4>. (46) Branchlets not glaucous, or thinly glaucous <4>, or thickly
glaucous <1>. (47) Branchlets glabrous <10>, or hairy <11>, or glabrescent
<2>. (48) Branchlets puberulent <2/12>, or pubescent <1/12>, or pilose <4/12>,
or villous <10/12>, or short-silky <1/12>, or long-silky <1/12>. (49)
Branchlets hair sparse <9/11>, or moderately dense <8/11>, or very dense
<7/11>. (50) Branchlets hair appressed <4/11>, or fishhook-curved <3/11>, or
spreading <8/11>. (51) Bud scale inner membrane free and separating from outer
membrane <2>, or free but not separating from outer membrane <7>, or fused to
outer layer <7>. (52) Stipules present <14>, or absent <6>. (53) Stipules not
sheathing <14/14>. (54) Stipules brown <1/1>, or green <1/1>. (55) Stipules
leaf-like <11/14>, or scale-like or rudimentary <8/14>. (56) Stipules apex
acuminate <5/11>, or acute <9/11>, or obtuse <1/11>, or rounded <1/11>. (57)
Petioles present. (58) Petioles 1.5-9.493-46 mm long. (59) Petioles convex to
flat in cross-section <5>, or shallowly concave in cross-section <7>, or
deeply concave in cross-section, but margins not covering the groove <9>, or
deeply concave in cross-section, margins covering groove <1>. (60) Petioles
glabrous <10>, or hairy <9>, or glabrescent <1>. (61) Petioles adaxial surface
puberulent <3/10>, or pilose <4/10>, or villous <3/10>, or tomentose <1/10>,
or short-silky <1/10>. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the base of the leaf
absent, or glandular dots at the base of the leaf present <3>. (63) Juvenile
leaves reddish <3>, or yellowish green. (64) Juvenile leaves glabrous <8>, or
hairy <12>. (65) Juvenile leaves lower surface puberulent <1/12>, or pubescent
<3/12>, or pilose <2/12>, or villous <5/12>, or tomentose <2/12>, or woolly
<1/12>, or long-silky <4/12>. (66) Juvenile leaves hair sparse <7/12>, or
moderately dense <5/12>, or very dense <6/12>. (67) Juvenile leaves white
<12/12>, or gray <3/12>. (75) Ligules absent. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83)
Leaves distributed along the stems <14/14>. (84) Leaves alternate <1/1>. (85)
Leaves not distinctly distichous. (86) Leaves not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves
simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves 0.5-7.726-100 cm long. (90) Leaves
1-18.16-60 mm wide. (91) Leaf blades without auricles. (93) Leaf blades oblong
<4>, or elliptic, or circular <5>, or lanceolate <1>, or oblanceolate <5>, or
obovate <11>. (94) Leaf blades length-width ratio 0.7-2.383-4.8. (97) Leaf
blades herbaceous <14>, or leathery. (103) Leaf blades stomata only on lower
surface <12>, or stomata on both upper and lower surfaces <5>, or stomata on
upper surface only present along veins or at apex <6>. (104) Leaf blades
adaxial surface dull <3>, or shiny <12>, or highly glossy <5>. (107) Leaf
blades adaxially glabrous <13/13>, or glabrescent <5/13>, or hairy <8/13>.
(108) Leaf blades upper surface puberulent <1/10>, or pilose <5/10>, or
villous <5/10>, or short-silky <1/10>, or long-silky <3/10>. (109) Leaf blades
adaxial surface hairs sparse <9/10>, or moderately dense <4/10>. (110) Leaf
blades upper surface white <10/10>, or gray <1/10>, or a mixture of white and
rust-colored <1/10>. (111) Leaf blades abaxial surface not glaucous <2>, or
glaucous <12>, or obscured by hairs <1>. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface
glabrous <11>, or glabrescent <6>, or hairy <10>. (113) Leaf blades abaxial
surface pilose <5/10>, or villous <6/10>, or tomentose <2/10>, or short-silky
<2/10>, or long-silky <4/10>, or woolly <1/10>. (114) Leaf blades abaxial
hairs sparse <9/10>, or hairs moderately dense <4/10>, or hairs very dense
<4/10>. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white <10/10>, or hairs
rust-colored <1/10>, or hairs mixture of white and rust-colored <2/10>. (116)
Leaf blades abaxial surface appressed <6/10>, or spreading <8/10>, or erect
<1/10>. (117) Leaf blades abaxial surface straight <8/10>, or wavy <5/10>, or
curved <2/10>. (122) Leaf blades not septate nodulose. (123) Leaf blades
secondary veins impressed into adaxial surface, protruding on abaxial surface
<5>, or protruding on adaxial and abaxial surfaces <8>, or flat on adaxial
surface, protruding on abaxial surface <7>. (124) Leaf blades secondary veins
arising along midrib <13>, or mostly arising at or close to a single point at
base and running in recurved arches toward leaf apex <2>. (125) Leaf bases
cordate <3>, or truncate <1>, or obtuse <8>, or acute <12>, or cuneate <8>, or
attenuate <7>, or rounded <1>. (126) Leaf blades flat <10>, or revolute <12>.
(127) Leaf margins entire <13>, or toothed <10>. (128) Leaf margins
glandular-dotted <12/14>, or serrulate <5/14>, or crenate <7/14>, or entire
<1/14>. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands all around leaf <12/14>, or
toward base only <7/14>, or toward apex only <1/14>. (130) Leaf margins with
1-5.923-20 teeth or glands per cm. (131) Leaf glands marginal <8/14>, or
submarginal <10/14>. (132) Leaf margins without hairs. (133) Leaf apices
acuminate <4>, or acute <12>, or obtuse <6>, or rounded <9>, or retuse <5>.
(134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent. (144) Flag leaf sheaths not inflated.
(146) Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (148) Pistilate or bisexual
spike(s) without empty bracts at the base. (149) Flowers in inflorescences.
(150) Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (159)
Inflorescence without bulbils. (169) Catkins flowering before the opening of
leaf buds <5>, or with the opening of leaf buds <10>. (170) Catkins terminal
on previous year's shoot <4>, or one to several just below tip of previous
year's shoot <12>, or numerous just below tip of previous year's shoot <1>.
(171) Male catkins densely flowered <13>, or moderately densely flowered <3>,
or loosely flowered <1>. (172) Male catkins 2-25.68-55 mm long. (173) Male
catkins 1.5-10.88-21 mm wide. (174) Male catkins slender <8>, or stout <14>,
or subglobose <9>, or globose <2>, or shape indeterminate <1>. (175) Male
catkins peduncles 0-4.125-26 mm long. (176) Male catkins borne on a flowering
branchlet <10>, or sessile <5>. (177) Male catkins flowering branchlets
0-6.208-32 mm long. (178) Female catkins densely flowered <14>, or moderately
densely flowered <7>, or loosely flowered <1>. (179) Female catkins
3-43.33-150 mm long. (180) Female catkins 2-11.6-25 mm wide. (181) Female
catkins slender <11>, or stout <14>, or subglobose <7>, or globose <3>, or
shape indeterminate <1>. (182) Female catkins peduncles 0-8.225-31 mm long.
(183) Female catkins borne on a flowering branchlet <11>, or sessile <5>.
(184) Female catkins flowering branchlets 0-11.8-80 mm long. (195) Flowers
unisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (199) Floral bracts tawny <7>, or
light rose <2>, or brown <13>, or black <10>, or bicolor <3>. (201) Floral
bracts not reflexed. (203) Floral bracts widest at base <6>, or widest at
middle <13>, or widest toward tip <7>. (204) Floral bracts not falling early.
(205) Floral bracts 0.5-1.946-3.7 mm long. (207) Floral bracts glabrous <4>,
or hairy all over <12>, or hairy mainly at apex <1>. (208) Floral bracts hairs
sparse <6/13>, or moderately dense <8/13>, or very dense <3/13>. (209) Floral
bracts straight <11/13>, or wavy <5/13>. (210) Floral bracts entire, or minute
undulations <1>. (231) Callus not differentiated. (252) Perianth absent. (254)
Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 1 <1>, or 2 <14>. (278)
Stamens free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free
of the corolla. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous <13>, or hairy all over <1>,
or hairy on lower half <5>, or hairy at base only <3>. (282) Anthers purple
<1>, or purple becoming yellow <14>, or reddish becoming yellow <1>. (283)
Anthers ellipsoid <12>, or stout-cylindrical <8>, or slender-cylindrical <2>,
or ovoid <1>, or subglobose <4>. (284) Anthers axis straight <14>, or axis
twisted <2>. (285) Anthers 0.3-0.56-0.9 mm long. (287) Male flowers abaxial
nectaries absent <8>, or one <8>, or two <2>. (288) Male flowers adaxial
nectaries one <14>, or two <1>, or several <1>. (289) Male flowers abaxial
nectaries slender-rod <13>, or broad-rod <13>, or square <4>, or ovate <6>, or
half-cup-shaped <1>. (290) Male flowers adaxial nectaries 0.4-0.7833-1.4 mm
long. (291) Male flowers nectaries separate <6/7>, or partially connected at
base <2/7>, or cup-shaped <2/7>. (293) Carpels syncarpous. (294) Carpels
completely fused. (297) Ovaries inverse club-shaped <6>, or pear-shaped, or
ovate <2>, or inverse turnip-shaped <1>. (298) Beak gradually tapering to
style <10>, or slightly bulged below style <7>, or abruptly tapering to style
<5>. (299) Ovaries glabrous <6>, or hairy <11>. (300) Ovaries puberulent
<1/11>, or pubescent <1/11>, or pilose <1/11>, or villous <5/11>, or tomentose
<2/11>, or short-silky <5/11>, or long-silky <3/11>. (301) Hairs in patches or
streaks <1/11>, or sparse <5/11>, or moderately dense <8/11>, or dense <8/11>.
(302) White <11/11>, or mixture of white and rust-colored <4/11>. (303)
Appressed <8/11>, or spreading <9/11>. (304) Straight <7/11>, or wavy <9/11>,
or crinkled <2/11>. (305) Flattened <10/11>, or ribbon-like <1/11>, or
cylindrical <1/11>. (306) Stipes 0-0.7107-2.8 mm long. (307) Styles present.
(308) Styles partially fused <1/1>. (310) Styles 0.2-1.116-3 mm long. (312)
Styles base not enlarged, continuous with the achene. (314) Stigmas
slender-cylindrical <12>, or broad-cylindrical <8>, or two plump lobes with
continuous stigmatic surface <1>. (315) Stigmas lobes 0.08-0.4893-1.28 mm
long. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 6-15-34. (318) Female flowers
abaxial nectaries absent <14>, or one <3>, or two <1>. (319) Female flowers
adaxial nectaries unlobed <14>, or two or more lobes <1>. (320) Female flowers
adaxial nectaries slender-rod <14>, or broad-rod <11>, or square <1>, or ovate
<5>. (321) Female flowers adaxial nectaries rachis 0.3-0.8933-2 mm long. (322)
Female flowers adaxial nectaries shorter than stipes <8>, or equal to stipes
<7>, or longer than stipes <12>. (323) Female flowers nectaries separate
<3/3>, or partially connected <2/3>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit
2.2-5.383-9 mm long. (333) Fruit glabrous <4>, or hairy <3>, or glabrescent
<10>. (334) Fruit calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles not persistent.
(349) Perigynia not inflated. (350) Perigynia without a wing. (351) Perigynia
not keeled. (353) Perigynia apex not bidentate <14/14>. (360) 2n = 17 <1/14>,
or 38 <8/14>, or 57 <1/14>, or 76 <5/14>, or 95 <1/14>, or 114 <3/14>. (364)
Amphi-Beringian <1/1>. (365) Low arctic <1/1>. (366) Of limited distribution
in the Arctic Islands <1/1>. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland <6>, or St.
Pierre and Miquelon <3>, or Canada, or United States <13>, or Eurasia <10>.
(369) Canada: Alta. <5>, or B.C. <10>, or Lab. <9>, or Man. <10>, or N.B. <1>,
or Nfld. <9>, or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.) <10>, or N.W.T. (Mack.)
<11>, or N.S. <4>, or Ont. <7>, or P.E.I. <1>, or Que. <10>, or Sask. <3 >, or
Yukon <10>. (370) USA: Alaska <9/13>, or Ariz. <2/13>, or Calif. <1/13>, or
Colo. <2/13>, or Idaho. <2/13>, or Maine <4/13>, or Mich. <1/13>, or Minn.
<1/13>, or Mont. <3/13>, or Nev. < 1/13>, or N.H. <3/13>, or N.Mex. <2/13>, or
N.York <2/13>, or Oreg. <4/13>, or S. Dak. <1/13>, or Utah <2/13>, or Vt.
<2/13>, or Wash. <3/13 >, or Wyo. <2/13>. (371) Arctic Islands: <1/1>. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Violflorae. (392)
Dahlgren's Order Salicales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Salicales. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Dillenianae. (418)
Takhtajan's Order Salicales. (424) Morphological data coded. (425) Species.
(426) Accepted in this study. (431) Code used for graphics files: wl.


Salix alaxensis <(Andersson) Cov.> var. alaxensis

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix alaxensis var. obovalifolia
Ball Salix speciosa Hook. & Arn., non Host nec Nutt. Salix speciosa var.
alaxensis Anderss. (9) Plants dioecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high.
(11) Plants 100-400 cm high. (12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants mid shrubs, or
tall shrubs, or trees. (16) Plants not colonial. (32) Stems erect <rarely
decumbent>. (40) Branches red-brown. (41) Branches not glaucous. (42) Branches
hairy. (43) Branches villous. (44) Branches epidermis not flaky. (45)
Branchlets gray-brown, or red-brown. (46) Branchlets not glaucous <rarely
glaucous>. (47) Branchlets hairy. (48) Branchlets villous. (49) Branchlets
hair very dense. (50) Branchlets hair spreading. (51) Bud scale inner membrane
fused to outer layer. (52) Stipules present. (55) Stipules leaf-like. (56)
Stipules apex acuminate, or acute. (58) Petioles (3-)5-15(-20) mm long. (59)
Petioles convex to flat in cross-section. (60) Petioles hairy. (61) Petioles
adaxial surface tomentose. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the base of the
leaf absent. (63) Juvenile leaves reddish, or yellowish green <often
obscured>. (64) Juvenile leaves hairy. (65) Juvenile leaves lower surface
tomentose, or woolly <combined>. (66) Juvenile leaves hair very dense. (67)
Juvenile leaves white. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves
5-11 cm long. (90) Leaves 13-35 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades oblong <broadly
oblong>, or elliptic <or narrowly elliptic>, or obovate <to broadly obovate>.
(94) Leaf blades length-width ratio 2-4. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or
leathery. (103) Leaf blades stomata only on lower surface. (104) Leaf blades
adaxial surface dull. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or hairy. (108)
Leaf blades upper surface villous, or long-silky <floccose>. (109) Leaf blades
adaxial surface hairs sparse, or moderately dense. (110) Leaf blades upper
surface white, or gray. (111) Leaf blades abaxial surface obscured by hairs.
(112) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairy. (113) Leaf blades abaxial surface
villous, or tomentose <combined>. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs very dense.
(115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white. (116) Leaf blades abaxial
surface spreading, or erect. (117) Leaf blades abaxial surface wavy. (123)
Leaf blades secondary veins impressed into adaxial surface, protruding on
abaxial surface. (124) Leaf blades secondary veins arising along midrib. (125)
Leaf bases acute, or cuneate. (126) Leaf blades revolute. (127) Leaf margins
toothed. (128) Leaf margins glandular-dotted, or crenate. (129) Leaf margins
with teeth or glands all around leaf <more towards tip>. (130) Leaf margins
with 2-5 teeth or glands per cm <3>. (131) Leaf glands submarginal. (133) Leaf
apices acuminate, or acute. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (169) Catkins
flowering before the opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins one to several just
below tip of previous year's shoot. (171) Male catkins densely flowered. (172)
Male catkins 28-55 mm long. (173) Male catkins 13-20 mm wide. (174) Male
catkins stout, or slender, or subglobose. (175) Male catkins peduncles 0 mm
long. (176) Male catkins sessile. (177) Male catkins flowering branchlets 0 mm
long. (178) Female catkins densely flowered. (179) Female catkins 30-150 mm
long. (180) Female catkins 10-22 mm wide. (181) Female catkins slender, or
stout. (182) Female catkins peduncles 0-17 mm long. (183) Female catkins
sessile. (184) Female catkins flowering branchlets 0 mm long. (195) Flowers
unisexual. (199) Floral bracts brown, or black. (201) Floral bracts not
reflexed. (203) Floral bracts widest at middle, or widest at base. (204)
Floral bracts not falling early. (205) Floral bracts 1.5-2.5 mm long. (207)
Floral bracts hairy all over. (208) Floral bracts hairs sparse. (209) Floral
bracts straight. (210) Floral bracts entire. (252) Perianth absent. (254)
Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 2. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (282) Anthers purple becoming yellow. (283) Anthers
slender-cylindrical. (284) Anthers axis straight. (285) Anthers 0.6-0.9 mm
long. (287) Male flowers abaxial nectaries absent. (288) Male flowers adaxial
nectaries one. (289) Male flowers abaxial nectaries broad-rod, or slender-rod.
(290) Male flowers adaxial nectaries 0.5-1 mm long. (297) Ovaries pear-shaped.
(298) Beak gradually tapering to style. (299) Ovaries hairy. (300) Ovaries
villous. (301) Hairs sparse, or moderately dense. (302) White. (303)
Spreading. (304) Wavy. (305) Flattened <refractive>. (306) Stipes 0-0.4 mm
long. (310) Styles 1.3-2.8 mm long. (314) Stigmas slender-cylindrical. (315)
Stigmas lobes 0.4-1.28 mm long <0.99>. (317) Ovules 12-18. (318) Female
flowers abaxial nectaries absent. (319) Female flowers adaxial nectaries
unlobed. (320) Female flowers adaxial nectaries slender-rod. (321) Female
flowers adaxial nectaries rachis 0.6-1 mm long. (322) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries longer than stipes. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit 4-5 mm long.
(333) Fruit glabrescent. (360) 2n = 38. (361) Johnson & Packer 1968; Löve &
Löve 1982; Suda & Argus 1969. Russia, Zhukova 1967, 1969. (363) Ploidy levels
recorded 2x. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States, or Eurasia
<northern and eastern Siberia>. (369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Man., or
N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Que., or Yukon.
(370) USA: Alaska. (380) Forming small thickets, 0.5-3 m tall, in protected
places with good winter snow cover. On moderately well-drained to wet sand
plains and remnant dune on river deltas, terraces, and river banks. Sometimes
on coarse, calcareous gravel on river and lake shores or on scree slopes.
(384) 2n=38 (Zhukova 1967, 1969). (429) REC.DATE: 7 MAR 91, MORPH: Argus 73,
Brayshaw 76, BC, NWT, QU(CAN), DIST.: CAN MT. (431) Code used for graphics
files: wlslal.


Salix arctica <Pall.>

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix anglorum auct. non Cham. Salix
anglorum var. antiplasta Schneid. Salix anglorum var. araioclada Schneid.
Salix anglorum var. kophophylla Schneid. Salix arctica subsp. crassijulis
(Trautv.) Skvort. Salix arctica subsp. tortulosa (Trautv.) Hultén Salix
arctica var. 0antiplasta (Schneid.) Fern. Salix arctica var. araioclada
(Schneid.) Raup Salix arctica var. brownei Anderss. Salix arctica var.
kophophylla (Schneid.) Polunin Salix arctica var. pallasii (Anderss.) Kurtz
Salix arctica var. tortulosa (Trautv.) Raup Salix brownei (Anderss.) Bebb
Salix brownei var. petraea (Anderss.) Bebb Salix crassijulis Trautv. Salix
hudsonensis Schneid. Salix pallasii Anderss. Salix pallasii var. crassijulis
(Trautv.) Anderss. Salix tortulosa Trautv. (9) Plants dioecious. (10) Plants
less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 3-25 cm high. (12) Plants shrubs. (13)
Plants dwarf shrubs. (16) Plants not colonial, or forming colonies by
layering. (32) Stems decumbent, or prostrate, or erect. (40) Branches
yellow-brown, or yellowish, or gray-brown, or red-brown, or brownish. (41)
Branches not glaucous, or thickly glaucous. (42) Branches glabrous, or
glabrescent. (44) Branches epidermis not flaky. (45) Branchlets yellow-brown,
or red-brown, or violet. (46) Branchlets not glaucous, or thinly glaucous, or
thickly glaucous. (47) Branchlets glabrous, or hairy. (48) Branchlets pilose,
or villous. (49) Branchlets hair sparse, or very dense. (50) Branchlets hair
spreading. (51) Bud scale inner membrane free but not separating from outer
membrane. (52) Stipules absent, or present <caducous>. (55) Stipules
leaf-like, or scale-like or rudimentary. (56) Stipules apex acute. (58)
Petioles 2-35 mm long. (59) Petioles deeply concave in cross-section, but
margins not covering the groove. (60) Petioles glabrous. (61) Petioles adaxial
surface puberulent. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the base of the leaf
absent. (63) Juvenile leaves yellowish green. (64) Juvenile leaves glabrous,
or hairy. (65) Juvenile leaves lower surface villous <long, straight hairs
pointing toward tip>. (66) Juvenile leaves hair sparse. (67) Juvenile leaves
white. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 1-8.5 cm long.
(90) Leaves 5.5-60 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades elliptic <narrowly elliptic to
subcircular>, or circular, or oblanceolate, or obovate <to broadly obovate>.
(94) Leaf blades length-width ratio 1-3.6. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or
leathery. (103) Leaf blades stomata only on lower surface, or stomata on upper
surface only present along veins or at apex. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface
shiny, or dull. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or hairy, or
glabrescent. (108) Leaf blades upper surface pilose <hairs near margin>. (109)
Leaf blades adaxial surface hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface
white. (111) Leaf blades abaxial surface glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glabrous, or hairy, or glabrescent <beard at tip>. (113) Leaf blades
abaxial surface long-silky, or pilose. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse.
(115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white. (116) Leaf blades abaxial
surface spreading, or appressed. (117) Leaf blades abaxial surface straight
<typical>, or wavy. (123) Leaf blades secondary veins protruding on adaxial
and abaxial surfaces, or flat on adaxial surface, protruding on abaxial
surface. (124) Leaf blades secondary veins arising along midrib. (125) Leaf
bases cuneate, or attenuate, or acute. (126) Leaf blades revolute, or flat.
(127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins glandular-dotted and entire.
(129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands toward base only. (130) Leaf margins
with 1-3 teeth or glands per cm. (131) Leaf glands submarginal, or marginal.
(133) Leaf apices obtuse, or rounded, or acute. (151) Inflorescence a catkin.
(169) Catkins flowering with the opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins one to
several just below tip of previous year's shoot. (171) Male catkins densely
flowered. (172) Male catkins 11-50 mm long. (173) Male catkins 5-18 mm wide.
(174) Male catkins slender, or stout, or subglobose. (175) Male catkins
peduncles 2-13 mm long. (176) Male catkins borne on a flowering branchlet.
(177) Male catkins flowering branchlets 2-20 mm long. (178) Female catkins
densely flowered, or moderately densely flowered. (179) Female catkins 11-120
mm long. (180) Female catkins 8-18 mm wide. (181) Female catkins slender, or
stout, or subglobose. (182) Female catkins peduncles 4-30 mm long. (183)
Female catkins borne on a flowering branchlet. (184) Female catkins flowering
branchlets 2-80 mm long. (195) Flowers unisexual. (199) Floral bracts brown,
or black <rarely light brown>. (201) Floral bracts not reflexed. (203) Floral
bracts widest at base, or widest at middle. (204) Floral bracts not falling
early. (205) Floral bracts 1.6-3.7 mm long. (207) Floral bracts hairy all
over. (208) Floral bracts hairs sparse. (209) Floral bracts straight <long>.
(210) Floral bracts entire, or minute undulations <or with 2-3 undulations>.
(252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens
2. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers purple <rarely becoming
yellowish>. (283) Anthers ellipsoid. (284) Anthers axis straight. (285)
Anthers 0.4-0.9 mm long. (287) Male flowers abaxial nectaries absent, or one.
(288) Male flowers adaxial nectaries one. (289) Male flowers abaxial nectaries
slender-rod, or broad-rod, or square. (290) Male flowers adaxial nectaries
0.5-1.2 mm long. (297) Ovaries inverse club-shaped, or pear-shaped. (298) Beak
abruptly tapering to style, or slightly bulged below style, or gradually
tapering to style. (299) Ovaries hairy. (300) Ovaries villous. (301) Hairs
dense, or sparse, or moderately dense. (302) White. (303) Spreading. (304)
Wavy. (305) Flattened <sometimes refractive>. (306) Stipes 0.2-1.6 mm long.
(310) Styles 0.6-2.2 mm long. (314) Stigmas slender-cylindrical <sometimes
stout>. (315) Stigmas lobes 0.36-0.88 mm long <0.56>. (317) Ovules 10-18.
(318) Female flowers abaxial nectaries absent. (319) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries unlobed. (320) Female flowers adaxial nectaries broad-rod, or ovate,
or slender-rod. (321) Female flowers adaxial nectaries rachis 0.4-1.8 mm long.
(322) Female flowers adaxial nectaries longer than stipes, or equal to stipes
<usually 1.5-4X, rarely equal>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit 4-9 mm
long. (333) Fruit hairy, or glabrescent <sometimes glabrescent>. (360) 2n = 76
and 114. (361) 4x Dawson (pers. comm. 1986); Holmen 1952; Mosquin & Haley
1966; Johnson & Packer 1968. 6x Suda & Argus 1969. Russia 4x Zhukova &
Petrovsky 1980. 6x Zhukova et al 1973; Petrovsky & Zhukova 1983; Zhukova &
Petrovsky 1987. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4 & 6x. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada:
Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T.
(Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or
Idaho., or Mont., or Oreg., or Wash. (380) A ubiquitous dwarf shrub often
forming prostrate mats spreading from a central stem. It may occur on sparsely
vegetated surfaces or spreading over dense tundra vegetation. It grows in most
arctic habitats including hummocks in wet sphagnum bogs and sedge meadows,
polygonal tundra, solifluction slopes, snow beds, margins of pools, beach
ridges, shaley and gypsum ridges, gneissic cliffs, colluvial slopes, talus
slopes, imperfectly drained calcareous silty till, muddy salt flats,
frost-heaved clay polygons, dry calcareous gravel, and coarse sandy soil.
Plants are often heavily browsed by muskox and arctic hares. Elevation 0-700
m. (384) Descr excludes S. petrophila. Leaf margins somet purplish. Capsules
often reddish, sometimes brownish. Bud scales glaucous or not, chestnut-brown,
glabrous or sparsely long-hairy. (429) REC.DATE: 26 NOV 92(combined),15 FEB 92
18 MAR 90, 29 DEC 96, 13 MAY 97, MORPH: Argus 73, 90, Brayshaw 76, NWT QC NF
ON GR (CAN), DIST.: CAN QK MT. (431) Code used for graphics files: wlsarar.


Salix arctophila <Cock. ex Heller>

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix arctica Liebm., non Pallas
Salix arctophila var. lejocarpa (Lange) Schneid. Salix groenlandica Lundstr.,
non Heer Salix groenlandica var. lejocarpa Lange. (9) Plants dioecious. (10)
Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 3-15 cm high. (12) Plants shrubs.
(13) Plants dwarf shrubs. (16) Plants forming colonies by layering. (32) Stems
decumbent, or prostrate. (40) Branches yellow-brown, or red-brown <greenish
brown>. (41) Branches not glaucous, or thinly glaucous. (42) Branches
glabrous. (44) Branches epidermis not flaky. (45) Branchlets yellow-green, or
yellow-brown, or red-brown. (46) Branchlets not glaucous, or thinly glaucous.
(47) Branchlets glabrous, or hairy. (48) Branchlets pilose <sparse>. (51) Bud
scale inner membrane free but not separating from outer membrane. (52)
Stipules present, or absent. (55) Stipules leaf-like, or scale-like or
rudimentary. (56) Stipules apex acute. (58) Petioles 3-13 mm long. (59)
Petioles deeply concave in cross-section, but margins not covering the groove.
(60) Petioles glabrous. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the base of the leaf
absent. (63) Juvenile leaves yellowish green. (64) Juvenile leaves glabrous,
or hairy. (65) Juvenile leaves lower surface pubescent. (66) Juvenile leaves
hair sparse. (67) Juvenile leaves white. (83) Leaves distributed along the
stems. (89) Leaves 1.7-3.7 cm long. (90) Leaves 7-16 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
elliptic <to subcircular>, or obovate <to broadly obovate>. (94) Leaf blades
length-width ratio 1.2-1.8(-4.3). (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or leathery.
(103) Leaf blades stomata only on lower surface, or stomata on upper surface
only present along veins or at apex. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface shiny,
or highly glossy. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (111) Leaf blades
abaxial surface glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (123)
Leaf blades secondary veins protruding on adaxial and abaxial surfaces. (124)
Leaf blades secondary veins arising along midrib. (125) Leaf bases obtuse, or
acute, or cuneate. (126) Leaf blades revolute. (127) Leaf margins entire, or
toothed. (128) Leaf margins entire, or glandular-dotted, or serrulate <rarely
teeth glandular>. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands all around leaf, or
toward base only. (130) Leaf margins with 1-8 teeth or glands per cm <5>.
(131) Leaf glands marginal, or submarginal. (133) Leaf apices retuse, or
rounded, or acute. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (169) Catkins flowering with
the opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins one to several just below tip of
previous year's shoot. (171) Male catkins densely flowered, or moderately
densely flowered. (172) Male catkins 17-50 mm long. (173) Male catkins 7-16 mm
wide. (174) Male catkins slender, or stout. (175) Male catkins peduncles 2-6
mm long. (176) Male catkins borne on a flowering branchlet. (177) Male catkins
flowering branchlets 4-15 mm long. (178) Female catkins densely flowered, or
moderately densely flowered. (179) Female catkins 16-116 mm long. (180) Female
catkins 10-20 mm wide. (181) Female catkins slender, or stout. (182) Female
catkins peduncles 4-24 mm long. (183) Female catkins borne on a flowering
branchlet. (184) Female catkins flowering branchlets 8-57 mm long. (195)
Flowers unisexual. (199) Floral bracts brown, or black, or bicolor <purplish
red>. (201) Floral bracts not reflexed. (203) Floral bracts widest at middle.
(204) Floral bracts not falling early. (205) Floral bracts 0.8-2.4 mm long.
(207) Floral bracts hairy all over. (208) Floral bracts hairs moderately
dense, or very dense. (209) Floral bracts straight. (210) Floral bracts
entire. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277)
Stamens 2. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous, or hairy on lower half. (282)
Anthers purple becoming yellow. (283) Anthers ellipsoid, or
slender-cylindrical. (284) Anthers axis twisted. (285) Anthers 0.5-0.7 mm
long. (287) Male flowers abaxial nectaries absent. (288) Male flowers adaxial
nectaries one. (289) Male flowers abaxial nectaries broad-rod, or square, or
slender-rod, or ovate. (290) Male flowers adaxial nectaries 0.4-1 mm long.
(297) Ovaries pear-shaped, or inverse club-shaped. (298) Beak gradually
tapering to style, or slightly bulged below style. (299) Ovaries glabrous, or
hairy. (300) Ovaries puberulent, or short-silky <dusty look>. (301) Hairs
sparse. (302) White, or mixture of white and rust-colored <refractive>. (303)
Appressed. (304) Wavy, or crinkled. (305) Ribbon-like, or flattened. (306)
Stipes 0.8-1.4 mm long. (310) Styles 0.6-1.4 mm long. (314) Stigmas
slender-cylindrical, or broad-cylindrical. (315) Stigmas lobes 0.24-0.72 mm
long <0.47>. (317) Ovules 12-16. (318) Female flowers abaxial nectaries
absent. (319) Female flowers adaxial nectaries unlobed. (320) Female flowers
adaxial nectaries broad-rod, or slender-rod <sometimes bifid>. (321) Female
flowers adaxial nectaries rachis 0.5-0.9 mm long. (322) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries shorter than stipes. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit 5-9 mm long.
(333) Fruit hairy, or glabrescent. (360) 2n = 76. (361) Jorgensen, Sorensen, &
Westergaard 1958; Löve & Löve 1982. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4x. (368)
Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States. (369) Canada:
Lab., or Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T.
(Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska, or Maine.
(380) A prostrate shrub, often with long, trailing stems. Often on hummocks,
in wet, mossy, grass or sedge tundra meadows. Common along the edges of
streams or ponds, among granitic boulders, on alluvial plains, or sometimes in
snow beds. (384) Proximal leaves rarely sparsely long-silky. (429) REC.DATE:
18 NOV 92, 20 AUG 91, MORPH: Argus 73, NWT MB GR (CAN), DIST: CAN QK MT. (431)
Code used for graphics files: wlsarph.


Salix calcicola <Fern. & Wieg.> var. calcicola

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix lanata subsp. calcicola (Fern.
& Wieg.) Hultén Salix lanata subsp. calcicola (Fern. & Wieg.) Hultén Salix
calcicola var. nicholsiana Polunin Salix richardsonii var. macouniana Bebb.
(9) Plants dioecious. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high, or more than 15 cm
high. (11) Plants 10-30 cm high. (12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants low shrubs.
(16) Plants not colonial. (32) Stems erect, or decumbent. (40) Branches
red-brown, or gray-brown, or yellow-brown. (41) Branches thinly glaucous, or
not glaucous. (42) Branches glabrous, or hairy, or glabrescent <usually
persistent>. (43) Branches villous. (44) Branches epidermis flaky. (45)
Branchlets red-brown, or yellow-brown. (46) Branchlets not glaucous. (47)
Branchlets hairy. (48) Branchlets villous. (49) Branchlets hair moderately
dense. (50) Branchlets hair spreading. (51) Bud scale inner membrane free and
separating from outer membrane. (52) Stipules present. (55) Stipules
leaf-like. (56) Stipules apex acute, or obtuse, or rounded. (58) Petioles 2-9
mm long. (59) Petioles shallowly concave in cross-section, or convex to flat
in cross-section. (60) Petioles hairy. (61) Petioles adaxial surface villous,
or pilose. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the base of the leaf absent. (63)
Juvenile leaves yellowish green, or reddish. (64) Juvenile leaves hairy. (65)
Juvenile leaves lower surface villous <abaxial side only>. (66) Juvenile
leaves hair moderately dense. (67) Juvenile leaves white. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 1.7-6.1 cm long. (90) Leaves 11-40 mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades elliptic <to subcircular>. (94) Leaf blades
length-width ratio 0.7-2.6. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or leathery. (103)
Leaf blades stomata only on lower surface, or stomata on upper surface only
present along veins or at apex. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface dull. (108)
Leaf blades upper surface villous, or pilose. (109) Leaf blades adaxial
surface hairs moderately dense. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white. (111)
Leaf blades abaxial surface glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface
glabrous, or hairy, or glabrescent. (113) Leaf blades abaxial surface pilose,
or villous. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse. (115) Leaf blades abaxial
surface hairs white. (116) Leaf blades abaxial surface spreading. (117) Leaf
blades abaxial surface straight. (123) Leaf blades secondary veins impressed
into adaxial surface, protruding on abaxial surface. (124) Leaf blades
secondary veins arising along midrib. (125) Leaf bases attenuate, or cordate,
or acute. (126) Leaf blades revolute, or flat <edges often purplish>. (127)
Leaf margins entire, or toothed. (128) Leaf margins entire and
glandular-dotted, or serrulate. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands all
around leaf, or toward base only. (130) Leaf margins with 6-18 teeth or glands
per cm <11>. (131) Leaf glands submarginal. (133) Leaf apices obtuse, or
rounded, or acute. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (169) Catkins flowering
before the opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins one to several just below tip
of previous year's shoot. (171) Male catkins densely flowered. (172) Male
catkins 18-45 mm long. (173) Male catkins 13-21 mm wide. (174) Male catkins
stout, or subglobose. (175) Male catkins peduncles 0 mm long. (176) Male
catkins sessile. (177) Male catkins flowering branchlets 0 mm long. (178)
Female catkins densely flowered. (179) Female catkins 22-80 mm long. (180)
Female catkins 12-25 mm wide. (181) Female catkins stout, or subglobose. (182)
Female catkins peduncles 0-7 mm long. (183) Female catkins sessile, or borne
on a flowering branchlet <rarely on fl brlts>. (184) Female catkins flowering
branchlets 0 mm long. (195) Flowers unisexual. (199) Floral bracts brown, or
black. (201) Floral bracts not reflexed. (203) Floral bracts widest at middle,
or widest at base. (204) Floral bracts not falling early. (205) Floral bracts
1.2-3.2 mm long. (207) Floral bracts hairy all over. (208) Floral bracts hairs
moderately dense. (209) Floral bracts straight. (210) Floral bracts entire.
(252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens
2. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers purple becoming yellow.
(283) Anthers ellipsoid, or stout-cylindrical. (284) Anthers axis straight.
(285) Anthers 0.5-0.7 mm long. (287) Male flowers abaxial nectaries absent.
(288) Male flowers adaxial nectaries one. (289) Male flowers abaxial nectaries
slender-rod, or broad-rod. (290) Male flowers adaxial nectaries 0.5-0.8 mm
long. (297) Ovaries pear-shaped, or inverse club-shaped. (298) Beak gradually
tapering to style. (299) Ovaries glabrous. (306) Stipes 0.2-1.2 mm long. (310)
Styles 1.6-3 mm long. (314) Stigmas broad-cylindrical, or slender-cylindrical.
(315) Stigmas lobes 0.2-0.56 mm long <0.38>. (317) Ovules 16-18. (318) Female
flowers abaxial nectaries absent. (319) Female flowers adaxial nectaries
unlobed. (320) Female flowers adaxial nectaries broad-rod. (321) Female
flowers adaxial nectaries rachis 0.6-1 mm long. (322) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries longer than stipes, or equal to stipes <rarely shorter>. (325) Fruit
a capsule. (327) Fruit 4.4-8 mm long. (333) Fruit glabrous. (360) 2n = 38.
(361) Löve & Löve 1982. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 2x. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Canada. (369) Canada: Lab., or Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.),
or N.W.T. (Keew.), or Ont., or Que. (380) Forming small thickets, about 0.5 m
tall, on calcareous substrate. Usually in wet, stony or gravelly places,
rubble above high tide, and stream margins; but also on sandy and silty shores
of brooks, low dunes, and clay frost boils. (384) Excluding Rocky Mt. pops.
Hybrids with S. richardsonii known from Churchill (CAN). (429) REC.DATE: NOV
90, MORPH: CAN, DIST.: CAN QK MT. (431) Code used for graphics files: wlsaca.


Salix glauca <L.> var. acutifolia <(Hook.) C. Schneider>

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix glauca subsp. acutifolia
(Hook.) Hultén Salix glauca var. alicea Ball Salix glauca var. perstipulata
Raup Salix glauca var. poliophylla (Schneid.) Raup Salix glauca var. seemanii
(Rydb.) Ostenf. Salix seemanii Rydb. Salix villosa var. acutifolia Hook. (9)
Plants dioecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 25-60 cm high.
(12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants low shrubs, or mid shrubs, or tall shrubs.
(16) Plants not colonial. (32) Stems erect. (40) Branches red-brown, or
brownish. (41) Branches not glaucous. (42) Branches glabrous, or hairy, or
glabrescent. (43) Branches villous, or pilose. (44) Branches epidermis flaky.
(45) Branchlets red-brown, or brownish. (46) Branchlets not glaucous. (47)
Branchlets glabrous, or hairy. (48) Branchlets villous. (49) Branchlets hair
moderately dense, or very dense, or sparse. (50) Branchlets hair appressed.
(51) Bud scale inner membrane free but not separating from outer membrane.
(52) Stipules present <linear to lanceolate>. (55) Stipules leaf-like. (56)
Stipules apex acuminate. (58) Petioles 4-27 mm long. (59) Petioles deeply
concave in cross-section, but margins not covering the groove, or shallowly
concave in cross-section. (60) Petioles hairy. (61) Petioles adaxial surface
pilose. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the base of the leaf absent. (63)
Juvenile leaves yellowish green. (64) Juvenile leaves hairy. (65) Juvenile
leaves lower surface villous, or long-silky. (66) Juvenile leaves hair very
dense, or moderately dense. (67) Juvenile leaves white. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 4.3-8.2 cm long. (90) Leaves 12-39 mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades oblanceolate, or obovate, or elliptic <to broadly
elliptic>. (94) Leaf blades length-width ratio 2.2-4.8. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous, or leathery. (103) Leaf blades stomata only on lower surface.
(104) Leaf blades adaxial surface shiny. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous,
or hairy, or glabrescent. (108) Leaf blades upper surface pilose. (109) Leaf
blades adaxial surface hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white.
(111) Leaf blades abaxial surface glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface
hairy. (113) Leaf blades abaxial surface villous, or tomentose
<villous-tomentose>, or short-silky. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse,
or hairs moderately dense, or hairs very dense. (115) Leaf blades abaxial
surface hairs white. (116) Leaf blades abaxial surface spreading, or
appressed. (117) Leaf blades abaxial surface straight, or wavy, or curved.
(123) Leaf blades secondary veins impressed into adaxial surface, protruding
on abaxial surface, or flat on adaxial surface, protruding on abaxial surface.
(124) Leaf blades secondary veins arising along midrib. (125) Leaf bases
acute, or attenuate. (126) Leaf blades revolute, or flat. (127) Leaf margins
entire. (128) Leaf margins entire and glandular-dotted. (129) Leaf margins
with teeth or glands all around leaf. (130) Leaf margins with 2-5 teeth or
glands per cm. (131) Leaf glands submarginal. (133) Leaf apices acuminate, or
acute. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (169) Catkins flowering with the opening
of leaf buds. (170) Catkins one to several just below tip of previous year's
shoot. (171) Male catkins densely flowered. (172) Male catkins 17-44 mm long.
(173) Male catkins 9-17 mm wide. (174) Male catkins slender, or stout. (175)
Male catkins peduncles 2-5 mm long. (176) Male catkins borne on a flowering
branchlet. (177) Male catkins flowering branchlets 2-9 mm long. (178) Female
catkins densely flowered, or moderately densely flowered <loose at base>.
(179) Female catkins 20-80 mm long. (180) Female catkins 8-17 mm wide. (181)
Female catkins slender, or stout. (182) Female catkins peduncles 3-19 mm long.
(183) Female catkins borne on a flowering branchlet. (184) Female catkins
flowering branchlets 6-40 mm long. (195) Flowers unisexual. (199) Floral
bracts tawny, or bicolor, or brown <light>. (201) Floral bracts not reflexed.
(203) Floral bracts widest at middle. (204) Floral bracts not falling early.
(205) Floral bracts 1.5-2.5 mm long. (207) Floral bracts hairy all over. (208)
Floral bracts hairs moderately dense. (209) Floral bracts wavy. (210) Floral
bracts entire. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals
absent. (277) Stamens 2. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers
purple becoming yellow. (283) Anthers ellipsoid, or stout-cylindrical. (284)
Anthers axis straight. (285) Anthers 0.5-0.8 mm long. (287) Male flowers
abaxial nectaries one <sometimes not evident>. (288) Male flowers adaxial
nectaries one. (289) Male flowers abaxial nectaries slender-rod, or broad-rod,
or square. (290) Male flowers adaxial nectaries 0.6-0.9 mm long. (291) Male
flowers nectaries separate. (297) Ovaries pear-shaped, or inverse club-shaped.
(298) Beak gradually tapering to style. (299) Ovaries hairy. (300) Ovaries
tomentose, or short-silky, or pubescent. (301) Hairs moderately dense, or
dense. (302) White. (303) Spreading, or appressed. (304) Straight, or wavy.
(305) Flattened. (306) Stipes 0.5-2.8 mm long. (310) Styles 0.3-1.4 mm long.
(314) Stigmas slender-cylindrical. (315) Stigmas lobes 0.4-0.8 mm long <0.59>.
(317) Ovules 12-22. (318) Female flowers abaxial nectaries absent. (319)
Female flowers adaxial nectaries unlobed. (320) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries slender-rod, or broad-rod. (321) Female flowers adaxial nectaries
rachis 0.6-1.4 mm long. (322) Female flowers adaxial nectaries shorter than
stipes, or equal to stipes <rarely longer>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit
5-9 mm long. (333) Fruit glabrescent. (360) 2n = 76, 95, and 114. (361) 4x
Suda & Argus 1969.5x Suda & Argus 1969. 6x Suda & Argus 1969. (363) Ploidy
levels recorded 4,5,& 6x. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States,
or Eurasia <eastern Russia>. (369) Canada: B.C., or N.W.T. (Mack.), or N.W.T.
(Frank.), or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (380) Rare in our area. Forming low
thickets in disturbed calcareous gravel. (384) Stipules prominent, margins
glandular toothed proximally. (429) REC.DATE: 21 July 93, MORPH: AK
(Interior), YT, BC (CAN), DIST.: CAN. (431) Code used for graphics files:
wlsagac.


Salix glauca <L.> var. callicarpaea <(Trautv.) Argus>

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix alpestris var. americana
Anderss. Salix anamesa Schneid. Salix atra Rydb. Salix barclayi var.
latiuscula Anderss. Salix callicarpaea Trautv. Salix cordifolia Pursh Salix
cordifolia subsp. callicarpaea (Trautv.) A. L÷ve Salix cordifolia var.
callicarpaea (Trautv.) Fern. Salix cordifolia var. eucycla Fern. Salix
cordifolia var. intonsa Fern. Salix cordifolia var. macounii (Rydb.) Schneid.
Salix cordifolia var. tonsa Fern. Salix glauca var. macounii (Rydb.) Boivin
Salix glauca var. stenolepis Polunin Salix labradorica Rydb. Salix macounii
Rydb. Salix rydbergii Heller Salix vacciniformis Rydb. (9) Plants dioecious.
(10) Plants more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 20-250 cm high. (12) Plants
shrubs. (13) Plants low shrubs, or mid shrubs, or tall shrubs. (16) Plants not
colonial. (32) Stems erect, or decumbent. (40) Branches yellow-brown, or
red-brown. (41) Branches not glaucous. (42) Branches glabrous, or hairy, or
glabrescent. (43) Branches villous. (44) Branches epidermis flaky. (45)
Branchlets red-brown. (46) Branchlets not glaucous. (47) Branchlets glabrous,
or hairy, or glabrescent. (48) Branchlets villous. (49) Branchlets hair
sparse, or moderately dense, or very dense. (50) Branchlets hair spreading.
(51) Bud scale inner membrane free but not separating from outer membrane.
(52) Stipules present. (55) Stipules leaf-like. (56) Stipules apex acute, or
acuminate. (58) Petioles 2-9 mm long. (59) Petioles deeply concave in
cross-section, but margins not covering the groove. (60) Petioles hairy. (61)
Petioles adaxial surface pilose. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the base of
the leaf absent. (63) Juvenile leaves yellowish green. (64) Juvenile leaves
hairy. (65) Juvenile leaves lower surface villous, or tomentose. (66) Juvenile
leaves hair sparse, or moderately dense, or very dense. (67) Juvenile leaves
white. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 1.7-6.3 cm long.
(90) Leaves 6-28 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades elliptic <to broadly elliptic>, or
oblanceolate, or obovate. (94) Leaf blades length-width ratio 1.4-3.5. (97)
Leaf blades herbaceous, or leathery. (103) Leaf blades stomata only on lower
surface. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface shiny. (107) Leaf blades adaxially
glabrous, or hairy, or glabrescent. (108) Leaf blades upper surface pilose, or
villous. (109) Leaf blades adaxial surface hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades
upper surface white. (111) Leaf blades abaxial surface glaucous. (112) Leaf
blades abaxial surface glabrous, or glabrescent, or hairy. (113) Leaf blades
abaxial surface pilose, or villous <rarely tomentose>. (114) Leaf blades
abaxial hairs sparse, or hairs moderately dense. (115) Leaf blades abaxial
surface hairs white. (116) Leaf blades abaxial surface spreading. (117) Leaf
blades abaxial surface straight, or wavy. (123) Leaf blades secondary veins
flat on adaxial surface, protruding on abaxial surface. (124) Leaf blades
secondary veins arising along midrib. (125) Leaf bases acute, or obtuse, or
attenuate. (126) Leaf blades revolute, or flat. (127) Leaf margins entire.
(128) Leaf margins entire and glandular-dotted <rarely serrulate>. (129) Leaf
margins with teeth or glands all around leaf. (130) Leaf margins with 1-3
teeth or glands per cm. (131) Leaf glands submarginal. (133) Leaf apices
acute, or obtuse, or rounded. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (169) Catkins
flowering with the opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins one to several just
below tip of previous year's shoot. (171) Male catkins densely flowered. (172)
Male catkins 8-30 mm long. (173) Male catkins 5-12 mm wide. (174) Male catkins
slender, or stout. (175) Male catkins peduncles 3-14 mm long. (176) Male
catkins borne on a flowering branchlet. (177) Male catkins flowering
branchlets 2-25 mm long. (178) Female catkins densely flowered, or moderately
densely flowered. (179) Female catkins 17-50 mm long. (180) Female catkins
7-15 mm wide. (181) Female catkins slender, or stout, or subglobose, or
globose. (182) Female catkins peduncles 3-14 mm long. (183) Female catkins
borne on a flowering branchlet. (184) Female catkins flowering branchlets 2-25
mm long. (195) Flowers unisexual. (199) Floral bracts tawny, or brown. (201)
Floral bracts not reflexed. (203) Floral bracts widest at middle. (204) Floral
bracts not falling early. (205) Floral bracts 2-3 mm long. (207) Floral bracts
hairy all over. (208) Floral bracts hairs sparse, or moderately dense. (209)
Floral bracts wavy, or straight. (210) Floral bracts entire. (252) Perianth
absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 2. (281)
Stamens filaments glabrous, or hairy at base only, or hairy on lower half.
(282) Anthers purple becoming yellow. (283) Anthers ellipsoid, or
stout-cylindrical. (284) Anthers axis straight. (285) Anthers 0.5-0.8 mm long.
(287) Male flowers abaxial nectaries one. (288) Male flowers adaxial nectaries
one. (289) Male flowers abaxial nectaries slender-rod, or broad-rod, or ovate.
(290) Male flowers adaxial nectaries 0.6-1.3 mm long. (291) Male flowers
nectaries separate. (297) Ovaries pear-shaped. (298) Beak gradually tapering
to style. (299) Ovaries hairy. (300) Ovaries villous, or tomentose. (301)
Hairs dense, or moderately dense. (302) White. (303) Spreading, or appressed.
(304) Wavy, or crinkled. (305) Flattened <sometimes refractive>. (306) Stipes
0.3-1.3 mm long. (310) Styles 0.7-1.4 mm long. (314) Stigmas
slender-cylindrical. (315) Stigmas lobes 0.36-0.72 mm long <0.48>. (317)
Ovules 10-18. (318) Female flowers abaxial nectaries absent. (319) Female
flowers adaxial nectaries unlobed. (320) Female flowers adaxial nectaries
slender-rod, or broad-rod. (321) Female flowers adaxial nectaries rachis
0.4-1.4 mm long. (322) Female flowers adaxial nectaries shorter than stipes,
or equal to stipes, or longer than stipes. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit
6-7.5 mm long. (333) Fruit glabrescent. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland,
or St. Pierre and Miquelon, or Canada, or Eurasia <Iceland>. (369) Canada:
Lab., or Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T.
(Mack.), or N.S., or Ont., or Que. (380) A low shrub of protected habitats.
Often prostrate on ground or rising espalier-like on the south- facing slope
of a boulder. Typically growing on sand and cobbles among granitic boulders,
on sandy alluvium, or on exposed eskers. Sometimes on scree slopes, in
sphagnum bogs, empetrum heats, or in snow beds. (384) Abaxial staminate floral
nectary not always present. (429) REC.DATE: 30 July 93, MORPH: LB NF QB, ON,
MB, NT (Baffin)(CAN), DIST.: CAN QK MT. (431) Code used for graphics files:
wlsagca.


Salix herbacea <L.>

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (9) Plants dioecious. (10) Plants less
than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 0.5-5 cm high. (12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants
dwarf shrubs. (16) Plants forming rhizomatous mats. (32) Stems erect. (40)
Branches red-brown, or violet. (41) Branches not glaucous. (42) Branches
glabrous. (44) Branches epidermis not flaky. (45) Branchlets yellow-brown, or
red-brown. (46) Branchlets not glaucous, or thinly glaucous. (47) Branchlets
glabrous. (51) Bud scale inner membrane fused to outer layer. (52) Stipules
absent. (58) Petioles 1.5-6 mm long. (59) Petioles convex to flat in
cross-section, or deeply concave in cross-section, but margins not covering
the groove. (60) Petioles glabrous. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the base
of the leaf absent. (63) Juvenile leaves yellowish green. (64) Juvenile leaves
glabrous. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 0.6-2.1 cm
long. (90) Leaves 6-17 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades circular, or elliptic
<broadly elliptic to subcircular or wider than long>. (94) Leaf blades
length-width ratio 0.9-1.4. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or leathery. (103)
Leaf blades stomata on both upper and lower surfaces. (104) Leaf blades
adaxial surface shiny. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (111) Leaf blades
abaxial surface not glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous.
(123) Leaf blades secondary veins protruding on adaxial and abaxial surfaces.
(124) Leaf blades secondary veins mostly arising at or close to a single point
at base and running in recurved arches toward leaf apex. (125) Leaf bases
cordate, or truncate <subcordate>. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins
toothed. (128) Leaf margins crenate <crenulate>. (129) Leaf margins with teeth
or glands all around leaf. (130) Leaf margins with 7-20 teeth or glands per
cm. (131) Leaf glands marginal. (133) Leaf apices obtuse, or rounded. (151)
Inflorescence a catkin. (169) Catkins flowering with the opening of leaf buds.
(170) Catkins terminal on previous year's shoot. (171) Male catkins loosely
flowered <2-10-fl>. (172) Male catkins 2-5.5 mm long. (173) Male catkins 1.5-5
mm wide. (174) Male catkins subglobose, or globose, or shape indeterminate.
(175) Male catkins peduncles 0.25-2 mm long. (176) Male catkins borne on a
flowering branchlet. (177) Male catkins flowering branchlets 0.25-2 mm long.
(178) Female catkins loosely flowered <2-11-fl>. (179) Female catkins 3-11 mm
long. (180) Female catkins 2-10 mm wide. (181) Female catkins subglobose, or
globose, or shape indeterminate. (182) Female catkins peduncles 0.25-4 mm
long. (183) Female catkins borne on a flowering branchlet. (184) Female
catkins flowering branchlets 0.75-3.5 mm long. (195) Flowers unisexual. (199)
Floral bracts tawny, or light rose, or brown. (201) Floral bracts not
reflexed. (203) Floral bracts widest toward tip. (204) Floral bracts not
falling early. (205) Floral bracts 0.5-1.5 mm long. (207) Floral bracts
glabrous <fringed at apex>. (210) Floral bracts entire. (252) Perianth absent.
(254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 2. (281) Stamens
filaments glabrous, or hairy on lower half. (282) Anthers purple becoming
yellow. (283) Anthers stout-cylindrical, or subglobose. (284) Anthers axis
straight. (285) Anthers 0.3-0.6 mm long. (287) Male flowers abaxial nectaries
one. (288) Male flowers adaxial nectaries one. (289) Male flowers abaxial
nectaries broad-rod, or ovate. (290) Male flowers adaxial nectaries 0.6-1.1 mm
long. (291) Male flowers nectaries separate, or partially connected at base.
(297) Ovaries pear-shaped, or ovate. (298) Beak abruptly tapering to style.
(299) Ovaries glabrous. (306) Stipes 0.28-1.12 mm long. (310) Styles 0.2-0.4
mm long <entire or bifid>. (314) Stigmas two plump lobes with continuous
stigmatic surface, or broad-cylindrical. (315) Stigmas lobes 0.08-0.32 mm long
<0.24>. (317) Ovules 12-18. (318) Female flowers abaxial nectaries absent, or
one. (319) Female flowers adaxial nectaries unlobed. (320) Female flowers
adaxial nectaries slender-rod, or broad-rod. (321) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries rachis 0.3-1.1 mm long. (322) Female flowers adaxial nectaries
longer than stipes, or shorter than stipes. (323) Female flowers nectaries
separate. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit 2.2-7.5 mm long. (333) Fruit
glabrous. (353) Perigynia apex <A dwarf, mat-forming shrub usually growing so
that only the tips of its branches appear above the moss or tundra. Typically
in snow beds and other places with good snow protection. Sometimes on
well-drained river banks, sandy beaches, granite boulder ridges, steep
bouldery slopes, or in marshes. It is usually on non-calcareous substrates but
it can grow in places exposed to sea-spray. Elevation 50 -120 ft.>. (360) 2n =
38. (361) Löve & Löve 1966, 1982. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 2x. (368)
Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United States. (369) Canada:
Lab., or Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or Que. (370)
USA: Maine, or N.H., or N.York. (384) Most but not all shoots ending in a
catkin. (429) REC.DATE: 23 SEP 92 13 MAY 97, MORPH (CAN), DIST.: CAN QK MT.
(431) Code used for graphics files: wlsahe.


Salix niphoclada <Rydb.>

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix brachycarpa var. mexiae Ball
Salix glauca var. niphoclada (Rydb.) Wiggins Salix muriei HultTn Salix
niphoclada var. mexiae (Ball) HultTn Salix niphoclada var. muriei (HultTn)
Raup. (9) Plants dioecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants
30-150(-300) cm high. (12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants low shrubs, or mid
shrubs. (16) Plants not colonial. (32) Stems erect, or decumbent, or
prostrate. (40) Branches gray-brown, or yellow-brown, or red-brown. (41)
Branches not glaucous. (42) Branches glabrous, or hairy, or glabrescent. (43)
Branches woolly, or tomentose. (44) Branches epidermis flaky. (45) Branchlets
violet, or red-brown, or yellow-green, or yellow-brown. (46) Branchlets not
glaucous. (47) Branchlets hairy. (48) Branchlets pilose, or villous, or
long-silky. (49) Branchlets hair very dense, or moderately dense, or sparse.
(50) Branchlets hair appressed, or fishhook-curved. (51) Bud scale inner
membrane fused to outer layer. (52) Stipules present. (55) Stipules leaf-like,
or scale-like or rudimentary. (56) Stipules apex acute. (58) Petioles 2-5 mm
long. (59) Petioles shallowly concave in cross-section. (60) Petioles hairy.
(61) Petioles adaxial surface villous. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the
base of the leaf absent. (63) Juvenile leaves yellowish green. (64) Juvenile
leaves hairy. (65) Juvenile leaves lower surface long-silky. (66) Juvenile
leaves hair moderately dense, or very dense. (67) Juvenile leaves white. (83)
Leaves distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 1.3-4.3 cm long. (90) Leaves
6-14 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades oblong <narrowly oblong>, or elliptic <narrowly
to broadly elliptic>, or lanceolate, or obovate. (94) Leaf blades length-width
ratio 1.6-3.8. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or leathery. (103) Leaf blades
stomata only on lower surface, or stomata on both upper and lower surfaces.
(104) Leaf blades adaxial surface shiny. (108) Leaf blades upper surface
villous. (109) Leaf blades adaxial surface hairs moderately dense, or sparse.
(110) Leaf blades upper surface white. (111) Leaf blades abaxial surface
glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairy. (113) Leaf blades abaxial
surface villous, or woolly, or pilose. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs very
dense, or hairs moderately dense, or hairs sparse. (115) Leaf blades abaxial
surface hairs white. (116) Leaf blades abaxial surface appressed, or
spreading. (117) Leaf blades abaxial surface straight, or wavy. (123) Leaf
blades secondary veins flat on adaxial surface, protruding on abaxial surface,
or protruding on adaxial and abaxial surfaces. (124) Leaf blades secondary
veins arising along midrib. (125) Leaf bases obtuse, or attenuate, or acute,
or cuneate. (126) Leaf blades revolute. (127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf
margins entire and glandular-dotted <obscured by hairs>. (129) Leaf margins
with teeth or glands toward base only. (131) Leaf glands marginal. (133) Leaf
apices acute, or acuminate. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (169) Catkins
flowering with the opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins one to several just
below tip of previous year's shoot. (171) Male catkins moderately densely
flowered, or densely flowered. (172) Male catkins 6-37 mm long. (173) Male
catkins 4-14 mm wide. (174) Male catkins slender, or stout, or subglobose.
(175) Male catkins peduncles 0-5 mm long. (176) Male catkins borne on a
flowering branchlet. (177) Male catkins flowering branchlets 0-12 mm long.
(178) Female catkins densely flowered, or moderately densely flowered. (179)
Female catkins 11-55 mm long. (180) Female catkins 5-13 mm wide. (181) Female
catkins slender, or stout. (182) Female catkins peduncles 2-14 mm long. (183)
Female catkins borne on a flowering branchlet. (184) Female catkins flowering
branchlets 3-25 mm long. (195) Flowers unisexual. (199) Floral bracts tawny,
or brown, or black <sometimes greenish or suffused with red>. (201) Floral
bracts not reflexed. (203) Floral bracts widest at base, or widest at middle,
or widest toward tip. (204) Floral bracts not falling early. (205) Floral
bracts 1.2-3.2 mm long. (207) Floral bracts hairy all over. (208) Floral
bracts hairs sparse, or moderately dense. (209) Floral bracts wavy. (210)
Floral bracts entire. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals
absent. (277) Stamens 2. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous, or hairy at base
only. (282) Anthers purple becoming yellow. (283) Anthers ellipsoid, or
subglobose. (284) Anthers axis straight. (285) Anthers 0.3-0.5 mm long. (287)
Male flowers abaxial nectaries one, or two. (288) Male flowers adaxial
nectaries one. (289) Male flowers abaxial nectaries slender-rod, or broad-rod,
or ovate. (290) Male flowers adaxial nectaries 0.5-1.2 mm long <0.87>. (291)
Male flowers nectaries separate. (297) Ovaries pear-shaped. (298) Beak
slightly bulged below style, or abruptly tapering to style. (299) Ovaries
hairy. (300) Ovaries villous, or long-silky. (301) Hairs dense. (302) White.
(303) Spreading, or appressed. (304) Straight, or wavy. (305) Flattened. (306)
Stipes 0-0.5 mm long. (310) Styles 0.2-0.8 mm long. (314) Stigmas
slender-cylindrical, or broad-cylindrical. (315) Stigmas lobes 0.2-0.6 mm long
<0.36>. (317) Ovules 12-20. (318) Female flowers abaxial nectaries absent.
(319) Female flowers adaxial nectaries unlobed. (320) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries slender-rod, or ovate. (321) Female flowers adaxial nectaries rachis
0.5-2 mm long. (322) Female flowers adaxial nectaries longer than stipes.
(325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit 4-6 mm long. (333) Fruit glabrescent. (360)
2n = 38. (361) Yurtsev et al. 1975; Zhukova & Tikhonova 1973; Zhukova &
Petrovsky 1987. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 2x. (368) Northern hemisphere:
Canada, or United States, or Eurasia <Siberia>. (369) Canada: B.C., or N.W.T.
(Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska.
(380) A shrub forming low thickets about 0.3 m tall, or as isolated erect or
prostrate shrubs on calcareous, gravelly or sandy floodplains, terraces,
eskers , and drumlins, or on fine, silty loess deposits. It habitat may be wet
to moderately well-drained. (384) 2n=38 in Russia, specimens need
confirmation. (429) REC.DATE: 19 AUG 92, MORPH: Argus 73, 91, Brayshaw 76,
CAN, DIST. CAN MT. (431) Code used for graphics files: wlsani.


Salix planifolia <Cham.>

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix chlorophylla Anderss. Salix
chlorophylla var. monica (Bebb) Flod. Salix chlorophylla var. nelsonii (Ball)
Flod. Salix chlorophylla var. pychnocarpa (Anderss.) Anderss. Salix monica
Bebb Salix nelsonii Ball Salix pennata Ball Salix phylicifolia subsp.
planifolia (Pursh) Hiitonen Salix phylicifolia var. monica (Bebb) Jepson Salix
phylicifolia var. pennata (Ball) Cronq. Salix planifolia var. monica (Bebb)
Schneid. Salix planifolia var. nelsonii (Ball) Ball ex E.C. Sm. Salix
planifolia var. pennata (Ball) Ball ex Dutilly, Lepage & Daman Salix
pychnocarpa Anderss. (9) Plants dioecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high.
(11) Plants 150-400 cm high. (12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants low shrubs, or
mid shrubs, or tall shrubs. (16) Plants not colonial. (32) Stems erect, or
decumbent. (40) Branches yellow-brown, or red-brown, or brownish <dark>. (41)
Branches not glaucous <sometimes to rarely glaucous>. (42) Branches glabrous,
or glabrescent. (44) Branches epidermis flaky. (45) Branchlets yellow-brown,
or red-brown, or brownish <dark>. (46) Branchlets not glaucous <sometimes to
rarely glaucous>. (47) Branchlets glabrous, or hairy, or glabrescent. (48)
Branchlets pubescent, or villous, or short-silky. (49) Branchlets hair sparse,
or moderately dense <rarely very dense>. (50) Branchlets hair appressed, or
fishhook-curved, or spreading. (51) Bud scale inner membrane free but not
separating from outer membrane, or fused to outer layer. (52) Stipules
present, or absent. (54) Stipules brown, or green. (55) Stipules leaf-like, or
scale-like or rudimentary. (56) Stipules apex acute. (58) Petioles 2-9(-13) mm
long. (59) Petioles shallowly concave in cross-section. (60) Petioles
glabrous, or hairy. (61) Petioles adaxial surface pilose, or short-silky. (62)
Petioles glandular dots at the base of the leaf absent. (63) Juvenile leaves
reddish, or yellowish green. (64) Juvenile leaves glabrous, or hairy. (65)
Juvenile leaves lower surface pubescent, or long-silky <translucent>. (66)
Juvenile leaves hair sparse, or moderately dense, or very dense. (67) Juvenile
leaves white, or gray. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves
2-4.5(-6.5) cm long. (90) Leaves 5-15(-23) mm wide. (93) Leaf blades oblong
<narrowly oblong>, or elliptic <to narrowly elliptic>, or oblanceolate. (94)
Leaf blades length-width ratio 1.5-4.7. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or
leathery. (103) Leaf blades stomata only on lower surface, or stomata on upper
surface only present along veins or at apex. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface
highly glossy. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or hairy, or glabrescent.
(108) Leaf blades upper surface short-silky. (109) Leaf blades adaxial surface
hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white. (111) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous, or hairy, or
glabrescent. (113) Leaf blades abaxial surface short-silky, or long-silky.
(114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface
hairs white, or hairs mixture of white and rust-colored, or hairs
rust-colored. (116) Leaf blades abaxial surface appressed. (117) Leaf blades
abaxial surface straight. (123) Leaf blades secondary veins protruding on
adaxial and abaxial surfaces, or flat on adaxial surface, protruding on
abaxial surface. (124) Leaf blades secondary veins arising along midrib. (125)
Leaf bases acute <rarely rounded>. (126) Leaf blades flat, or revolute
<particularly at base>. (127) Leaf margins entire, or toothed. (128) Leaf
margins entire and glandular-dotted, or serrulate, or crenate. (129) Leaf
margins with teeth or glands toward base only, or all around leaf. (130) Leaf
margins with 2-8 teeth or glands per cm <4>. (131) Leaf glands marginal, or
submarginal. (133) Leaf apices acute. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (169)
Catkins flowering before the opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins one to
several just below tip of previous year's shoot. (171) Male catkins densely
flowered. (172) Male catkins 11-39(-50) mm long. (173) Male catkins 10-15 mm
wide. (174) Male catkins stout, or subglobose. (175) Male catkins peduncles
0-6 mm long. (176) Male catkins sessile. (177) Male catkins flowering
branchlets 0 mm long. (178) Female catkins densely flowered. (179) Female
catkins 15-63 mm long. (180) Female catkins 8-18 mm wide. (181) Female catkins
slender, or stout. (182) Female catkins peduncles 0-9 mm long. (183) Female
catkins sessile <rarely with bracts>. (184) Female catkins flowering
branchlets 0 mm long. (195) Flowers unisexual. (199) Floral bracts brown, or
black. (201) Floral bracts not reflexed. (203) Floral bracts widest at base,
or widest at middle, or widest toward tip. (204) Floral bracts not falling
early. (205) Floral bracts 1-3.2 mm long. (207) Floral bracts hairy all over.
(208) Floral bracts hairs moderately dense, or very dense. (209) Floral bracts
straight. (210) Floral bracts entire. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals
absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 2. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous, or hairy at base only <sparsely so>. (282) Anthers purple becoming
yellow. (283) Anthers stout-cylindrical. (284) Anthers axis straight. (285)
Anthers 0.5-0.7 mm long. (287) Male flowers abaxial nectaries absent. (288)
Male flowers adaxial nectaries one. (289) Male flowers abaxial nectaries
slender-rod, or broad-rod. (290) Male flowers adaxial nectaries 0.4-0.8 mm
long. (297) Ovaries pear-shaped. (298) Beak slightly bulged below style, or
gradually tapering to style. (299) Ovaries hairy. (300) Ovaries short-silky,
or long-silky. (301) Hairs moderately dense, or dense. (302) White, or mixture
of white and rust-colored. (303) Appressed, or spreading. (304) Straight.
(305) Flattened. (306) Stipes 0.3-0.8 mm long. (310) Styles 0.5-2 mm long.
(314) Stigmas slender-cylindrical. (315) Stigmas lobes 0.36-0.92 mm long
<0.52>. (317) Ovules 10-16. (318) Female flowers abaxial nectaries absent.
(319) Female flowers adaxial nectaries unlobed. (320) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries slender-rod, or broad-rod, or square, or ovate <tapering to slender
tip>. (321) Female flowers adaxial nectaries rachis 0.4-1.3 mm long. (322)
Female flowers adaxial nectaries shorter than stipes, or equal to stipes, or
longer than stipes. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit (2.5-)5.5-6 mm long.
(333) Fruit glabrescent. (360) 2n = 57 and 76. (361) 3x Suda & Argus 1968,
1969. 4x Löve & Löve 1964, 1966, 1982, Löve et al. 1971, Suda & Argus 1968,
1969, Dorn 1975b. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 3 & 4x. (368) Northern
hemisphere: St. Pierre and Miquelon, or Canada, or United States. (369)
Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or
N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Ont., or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370)
USA: Alaska, or Ariz., or Calif., or Colo., or Idaho., or Maine, or Mich., or
Minn., or Mont., or Nev., or N.H., or N.Mex., or Oreg., or S. Dak., or Utah,
or Vt., or Wash. <?>, or Wyo. (380) A rare, but conspicuous, shrub, 0.6-4 m
tall (Polunin 1940), of sheltered stream valleys and snow beds. (384)
Description excluding S. planifolia monica. (429) REC.DATE: 9 NOV 88, 1 JUL
97, MORPH: Argus 73, SK, QC(CAN), DIST.: CAN MT. (431) Code used for graphics
files: wlsapl.


Salix polaris <Wahlenb.>

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix polaris subsp. pseudopolaris
(Flod.) Hultén Salix polaris var. glabrata Hultén Salix polaris var.
selwynensis Raup Salix pseudopolaris Flod. (9) Plants dioecious. (10) Plants
less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 1-9 cm high. (12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants
dwarf shrubs. (16) Plants forming rhizomatous mats. (32) Stems erect. (40)
Branches red-brown. (41) Branches thinly glaucous, or thickly glaucous. (42)
Branches glabrous. (44) Branches epidermis not flaky. (45) Branchlets
brownish. (46) Branchlets not glaucous. (47) Branchlets glabrous. (51) Bud
scale inner membrane fused to outer layer. (52) Stipules present, or absent.
(55) Stipules scale-like or rudimentary. (58) Petioles 2-10 mm long. (59)
Petioles deeply concave in cross-section, but margins not covering the groove.
(60) Petioles glabrous. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the base of the leaf
absent. (63) Juvenile leaves yellowish green. (64) Juvenile leaves glabrous.
(83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 0.5-3.2 cm long. (90)
Leaves 8-18 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades elliptic <to broadly elliptic>, or
obovate, or circular. (94) Leaf blades length-width ratio 1.1-2.8. (97) Leaf
blades herbaceous, or leathery. (103) Leaf blades stomata on both upper and
lower surfaces. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface shiny. (107) Leaf blades
adaxially glabrous <rarely ciliate distally>. (111) Leaf blades abaxial
surface not glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous <rarely with
long straight hairs>. (123) Leaf blades secondary veins protruding on adaxial
and abaxial surfaces, or flat on adaxial surface, protruding on abaxial
surface. (124) Leaf blades secondary veins arising along midrib. (125) Leaf
bases acute, or cuneate, or obtuse, or attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat.
(127) Leaf margins entire. (128) Leaf margins entire. (133) Leaf apices
rounded, or obtuse <sometimes>, or acute. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (169)
Catkins flowering with the opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins terminal on
previous year's shoot, or one to several just below tip of previous year's
shoot. (171) Male catkins densely flowered. (172) Male catkins 6-27 mm long.
(173) Male catkins 6-12 mm wide. (174) Male catkins stout, or subglobose, or
globose. (175) Male catkins peduncles 1.5-9 mm long. (176) Male catkins borne
on a flowering branchlet. (177) Male catkins flowering branchlets 1.5-14 mm
long. (178) Female catkins densely flowered, or moderately densely flowered.
(179) Female catkins 10-35 mm long. (180) Female catkins 7-13 mm wide. (181)
Female catkins stout, or subglobose, or globose. (182) Female catkins
peduncles 2-12 mm long. (183) Female catkins borne on a flowering branchlet.
(184) Female catkins flowering branchlets 1-12 mm long. (195) Flowers
unisexual. (199) Floral bracts brown, or black, or bicolor. (201) Floral
bracts not reflexed. (203) Floral bracts widest at middle, or widest toward
tip. (204) Floral bracts not falling early. (205) Floral bracts 1.5-2.5 mm
long. (207) Floral bracts hairy all over, or glabrous. (208) Floral bracts
hairs sparse. (209) Floral bracts straight, or wavy. (210) Floral bracts
entire. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277)
Stamens 2. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers purple becoming
yellow. (283) Anthers ellipsoid, or ovoid. (284) Anthers axis straight. (285)
Anthers 0.4-0.6 mm long. (287) Male flowers abaxial nectaries one <rarely
absent>. (288) Male flowers adaxial nectaries one. (289) Male flowers abaxial
nectaries broad-rod, or slender-rod, or square, or ovate. (290) Male flowers
adaxial nectaries 0.5-1.4 mm long <1.0>. (291) Male flowers nectaries
separate. (297) Ovaries inverse club-shaped, or pear-shaped. (298) Beak
gradually tapering to style, or slightly bulged below style. (299) Ovaries
glabrous, or hairy. (300) Ovaries villous, or pilose <hairy distally, or bare
only at base>. (301) Hairs in patches or streaks, or sparse, or moderately
dense, or dense. (302) White. (303) Spreading. (304) Straight, or wavy. (305)
Flattened <somewhat refractive>. (306) Stipes 0.2-0.7 mm long. (310) Styles
0.7-1.6 mm long. (314) Stigmas slender-cylindrical. (315) Stigmas lobes
0.4-0.72 mm long <0.57>. (317) Ovules 10-12. (318) Female flowers abaxial
nectaries absent. (319) Female flowers adaxial nectaries unlobed. (320) Female
flowers adaxial nectaries slender-rod, or broad-rod, or ovate. (321) Female
flowers adaxial nectaries rachis 0.8-1.4 mm long. (322) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries longer than stipes. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit 4.8-7 mm
long. (333) Fruit glabrescent. (360) 2n = 17 and 114. (361) 4x Marklund in
Floderus 1931 (origin unknown); ca 6x Engelskjon 1979 (Spitzbergen); 6x
Yurtsev & Zhukova 1982; Zhukova, et al. 1977; Zhukova & Petrovsky 1971, 1972,
1975, 1976, 1977, 1980; Zhukova et al. 1973; Zhukova & Tikhonova 1973;
Petrovsky & Zhukova 1983b (Russia). (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4 & 6x. (368)
Northern hemisphere: Canada, or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: B.C.,
or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Yukon. (370) USA: Ariz. (380) A
dwarf shrub of moist, mossy snowbeds, talus slopes, sides of depressed centre
frost polygons, sedge meadows, and mud boils. Often on calcareous tills , and
sandy marine silts. (429) REC.DATE: 9 SEP 92, 10 SEP 91, MORPH: Argus 1973,
Brayshaw 76, CAN, DIST. CAN QK MT. (431) Code used for graphics files: wlsapo.


Salix pulchra <Cham.>

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix arbusculoides var. glabra
(Anderss.) Anderss. ex Schneid. Salix barclayi var. hebecarpa Anderss. Salix
fulcrata var. subglauca Anderss. Salix phylicifolia subsp. pulchra (Cham.)
Hultén Salix phylicifolia var. subglauca (Anderss.) Boivin Salix phylicoides
Anderss. Salix planifolia var. yukonensis (Schneid.) Argus Salix pulchra var.
looffiae Ball Salix pulchra var. palmeri Ball Salix pulchravar. yukonensis
Schneid. (9) Plants dioecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high, or less than
15 cm high. (11) Plants 10-30(-450) cm high. (12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants
low shrubs, or mid shrubs, or tall shrubs. (16) Plants not colonial. (32)
Stems erect. (40) Branches red-brown, or brownish. (41) Branches not glaucous
<rarely glaucous>. (42) Branches glabrous, or hairy, or glabrescent. (43)
Branches villous <in patches>. (44) Branches epidermis flaky. (45) Branchlets
brownish. (46) Branchlets not glaucous <rarely glaucous>. (47) Branchlets
glabrous, or hairy. (48) Branchlets villous, or puberulent. (49) Branchlets
hair sparse, or moderately dense, or very dense. (50) Branchlets hair
spreading. (51) Bud scale inner membrane free but not separating from outer
membrane. (52) Stipules present <persist 2-4 yrs>. (55) Stipules leaf-like.
(56) Stipules apex acuminate. (58) Petioles 2.8-10(-15) mm long. (59) Petioles
convex to flat in cross-section. (60) Petioles glabrous, or hairy. (61)
Petioles adaxial surface puberulent <sparse>. (62) Petioles glandular dots at
the base of the leaf absent. (63) Juvenile leaves yellowish green. (64)
Juvenile leaves glabrous, or hairy. (65) Juvenile leaves lower surface
pubescent. (66) Juvenile leaves hair sparse. (67) Juvenile leaves white, or
gray. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves (2.2-)3.2-6(-7.5)
cm long. (90) Leaves (8-)10-23(-26) mm wide. (93) Leaf blades elliptic <to
narrowly elliptic>, or obovate. (94) Leaf blades length-width ratio
(1.7-)2-3.6(-4.7). (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or leathery. (103) Leaf blades
stomata only on lower surface. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface shiny, or
highly glossy. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous. (111) Leaf blades abaxial
surface glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous <midrib with wh
and ferr hairs>. (123) Leaf blades secondary veins flat on adaxial surface,
protruding on abaxial surface. (124) Leaf blades secondary veins arising along
midrib. (125) Leaf bases acute, or cuneate. (126) Leaf blades flat, or
revolute. (127) Leaf margins entire, or toothed. (128) Leaf margins entire and
glandular-dotted, or crenate. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands all
around leaf, or toward base only. (130) Leaf margins with 2-5 teeth or glands
per cm <3>. (131) Leaf glands submarginal, or marginal. (133) Leaf apices
acute, or retuse, or acuminate. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (169) Catkins
flowering before the opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins one to several just
below tip of previous year's shoot, or numerous just below tip of previous
year's shoot. (171) Male catkins densely flowered. (172) Male catkins 15-45 mm
long. (173) Male catkins 12-19 mm wide. (174) Male catkins stout. (175) Male
catkins peduncles 0-5 mm long. (176) Male catkins sessile. (177) Male catkins
flowering branchlets 0 mm long. (178) Female catkins densely flowered. (179)
Female catkins 25-80 mm long. (180) Female catkins 8-19 mm wide. (181) Female
catkins stout, or subglobose. (182) Female catkins peduncles 0-8 mm long.
(183) Female catkins sessile <sometimes 2-3 bracts>. (184) Female catkins
flowering branchlets 0 mm long. (195) Flowers unisexual. (199) Floral bracts
brown, or black. (201) Floral bracts not reflexed. (203) Floral bracts widest
at base. (204) Floral bracts not falling early. (205) Floral bracts 1.6-2.8 mm
long. (207) Floral bracts hairy mainly at apex. (208) Floral bracts hairs
moderately dense. (209) Floral bracts straight. (210) Floral bracts entire.
(252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens
2. (281) Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers purple becoming yellow.
(283) Anthers ellipsoid, or stout-cylindrical. (284) Anthers axis straight.
(285) Anthers 0.4-0.8 mm long. (287) Male flowers abaxial nectaries absent.
(288) Male flowers adaxial nectaries one. (289) Male flowers abaxial nectaries
slender-rod, or broad-rod. (290) Male flowers adaxial nectaries 0.6-0.9 mm
long. (297) Ovaries pear-shaped. (298) Beak slightly bulged below style. (299)
Ovaries hairy. (300) Ovaries long-silky. (301) Hairs moderately dense, or
sparse. (302) White, or mixture of white and rust-colored. (303) Appressed.
(304) Straight. (305) Flattened. (306) Stipes 0.2-0.8 mm long. (310) Styles
1-1.8 mm long. (314) Stigmas slender-cylindrical. (315) Stigmas lobes
0.44-0.96 mm long <0.63>. (317) Ovules 12-18. (318) Female flowers abaxial
nectaries absent. (319) Female flowers adaxial nectaries unlobed. (320) Female
flowers adaxial nectaries slender-rod, or broad-rod. (321) Female flowers
adaxial nectaries rachis 0.4-1.6 mm long. (322) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries longer than stipes. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit 3.2-5.6 mm
long. (333) Fruit glabrescent. (360) 2n = 76. (361) Johnson & Packer 1968;
Suda & Argus 1969. Russia Zhukova 1967, 1968, 1969; Zhukova et al. 1977;
Petrovsky & Zhukova 1983b. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 4x. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Canada, or United States, or Eurasia <Russia>. (369) Canada: B.C.,
or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Yukon. (370) USA: Alaska. (380) In
our area this rare shrub forms low thickets along river, lake, and streams.
(384) Stipules linear, longer than petiole. Syn = S. planifolia subsp.
pulchra. (429) REC.DATE: 30 DEC 91 MORPH: Argus 73, CAN, DIST.: CAN MT. (431)
Code used for graphics files: wlsapu.


Salix reticulata <L.> subsp. reticulata

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix orbicularis Anderss. Salix
reticulata subsp. orbicularis (Anderss.) Flod. Salix reticulata var.
gigantifolia Ball Salix reticulata var. glabra Trautv. Salix reticulata var.
orbicularis (Anderss.) Komarov Salix reticulata var. semicalva Fern. (9)
Plants dioecious. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 3-15 cm high.
(12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants dwarf shrubs. (16) Plants forming colonies by
layering. (32) Stems prostrate. (40) Branches yellow-brown, or red-brown. (41)
Branches not glaucous, or thinly glaucous <sometimes>. (42) Branches glabrous.
(44) Branches epidermis not flaky. (45) Branchlets yellow-brown, or red-brown.
(46) Branchlets not glaucous, or thinly glaucous <sometimes>. (47) Branchlets
glabrous. (51) Bud scale inner membrane fused to outer layer. (52) Stipules
present. (55) Stipules scale-like or rudimentary. (58) Petioles (3-)10-25(-46)
mm long. (59) Petioles deeply concave in cross-section, but margins not
covering the groove, or deeply concave in cross-section, margins covering
groove. (60) Petioles glabrous. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the base of
the leaf present, or glandular dots at the base of the leaf absent. (63)
Juvenile leaves yellowish green. (64) Juvenile leaves glabrous. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 1.2-6.6 cm long. (90) Leaves 8-50 mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades oblong <to broadly oblong>, or elliptic <broadly
elliptic to subcircular>, or circular. (94) Leaf blades length-width ratio
1-1.5. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or leathery. (103) Leaf blades stomata on
both upper and lower surfaces, or stomata on upper surface only present along
veins or at apex. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface shiny, or highly glossy.
(107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous <rarely sparsely villous>. (111) Leaf
blades abaxial surface glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous,
or hairy, or glabrescent. (113) Leaf blades abaxial surface long-silky. (114)
Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse. (115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs
white. (116) Leaf blades abaxial surface appressed. (117) Leaf blades abaxial
surface straight. (123) Leaf blades secondary veins impressed into adaxial
surface, protruding on abaxial surface. (124) Leaf blades secondary veins
mostly arising at or close to a single point at base and running in recurved
arches toward leaf apex. (125) Leaf bases obtuse, or attenuate, or cordate.
(126) Leaf blades revolute. (127) Leaf margins entire, or toothed. (128) Leaf
margins entire and glandular-dotted, or crenate <crenulate>. (129) Leaf
margins with teeth or glands all around leaf, or toward base only. (130) Leaf
margins with 2-9 teeth or glands per cm <6>. (131) Leaf glands submarginal.
(133) Leaf apices rounded, or retuse <rarely retuse>. (151) Inflorescence a
catkin. (169) Catkins flowering with the opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins
terminal on previous year's shoot. (171) Male catkins moderately densely
flowered <more than 12 flowers per ament>. (172) Male catkins 6-52 mm long.
(173) Male catkins 4-7 mm wide. (174) Male catkins stout, or subglobose, or
slender. (175) Male catkins peduncles 4-26 mm long. (176) Male catkins borne
on a flowering branchlet. (177) Male catkins flowering branchlets 2-32 mm
long. (178) Female catkins densely flowered <more than 6 flowers per ament>.
(179) Female catkins 6-60 mm long. (180) Female catkins 3-8 mm wide. (181)
Female catkins slender, or stout. (182) Female catkins peduncles 5-31 mm long.
(183) Female catkins borne on a flowering branchlet. (184) Female catkins
flowering branchlets 2-45 mm long. (195) Flowers unisexual. (199) Floral
bracts tawny. (201) Floral bracts not reflexed. (203) Floral bracts widest at
middle, or widest toward tip. (204) Floral bracts not falling early. (205)
Floral bracts 0.8-1.8 mm long. (207) Floral bracts glabrous <rarely hairy at
prox end>. (210) Floral bracts entire. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals
absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 2. (281) Stamens filaments hairy
all over, or hairy on lower half. (282) Anthers purple becoming yellow. (283)
Anthers ellipsoid, or subglobose. (284) Anthers axis straight. (285) Anthers
0.3-0.4 mm long. (287) Male flowers abaxial nectaries one, or two. (288) Male
flowers adaxial nectaries two, or several. (289) Male flowers abaxial
nectaries ovate, or broad-rod, or half-cup-shaped. (290) Male flowers adaxial
nectaries 0.5-0.8 mm long. (291) Male flowers nectaries partially connected at
base, or cup-shaped. (297) Ovaries inverse club-shaped, or pear-shaped. (298)
Beak slightly bulged below style, or abruptly tapering to style. (299) Ovaries
hairy. (300) Ovaries short-silky. (301) Hairs moderately dense, or dense.
(302) White, or mixture of white and rust-colored. (303) Appressed, or
spreading. (304) Straight, or wavy. (305) Flattened. (306) Stipes 0-0.8 mm
long. (310) Styles 0.2-0.3 mm long. (314) Stigmas broad-cylindrical. (315)
Stigmas lobes 0.2-0.32 mm long <0.26>. (317) Ovules 8-18. (318) Female flowers
abaxial nectaries absent, or one, or two. (319) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries two or more lobes. (320) Female flowers adaxial nectaries
slender-rod. (321) Female flowers adaxial nectaries rachis 0.5-0.8 mm long.
(322) Female flowers adaxial nectaries equal to stipes, or longer than stipes.
(323) Female flowers nectaries separate, or partially connected. (325) Fruit a
capsule. (327) Fruit 4.5-5 mm long. (333) Fruit glabrescent <sparsely>. (360)
2n = 38. (361) Löve 1954; Hedberg 1967; Suda & Argus 1969; Packer & McPherson
1974; Löve & Löve 1982. Russia, Zhukova 1967, 1980; Zhukova et al. 1977;
Zhukova & Petrovsky 1976, 1977; Petrovsky & Zhukova 1983b. (363) Ploidy levels
recorded 2x. (368) Northern hemisphere: Greenland, or Canada, or United
States, or Eurasia <circumpolar>. (369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or
Man., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or
N.S. <?>, or Ont., or P.E.I. <?>, or Que., or Sask., or Yukon. (370) USA:
Alaska, or Colo., or N.Mex., or Oreg., or Utah, or Wyo. (380) A dwarf shrub
forming mats in moist tundra on gravel and sand beaches, stream banks,
colluvial slopes, edges of frost polygons, and snowbeds. Usually in places
well protected by winter snow cover. Often but not exclusively on calcareous
substrates. (429) REC.DATE: 28 FEB 91, 10 JAN 92, MORPH: Argus 1973, NWT
(CAN), DIST.: CAN QK MT. (431) Code used for graphics files: wlsaret.


Salix richardsonii <Hook.>

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix lanata subsp. richardsonii
(Hook.) Skvort. Salix richardsonii var. mckeandii Polunin. (9) Plants
dioecious. (10) Plants more than 15 cm high. (11) Plants 30-650 cm high. (12)
Plants shrubs. (13) Plants low shrubs, or mid shrubs, or tall shrubs. (16)
Plants not colonial. (32) Stems erect. (40) Branches red-brown, or violet, or
yellow-brown. (41) Branches not glaucous. (42) Branches glabrous, or hairy, or
glabrescent <patches of hairs>. (43) Branches villous. (44) Branches epidermis
flaky. (45) Branchlets red-brown, or yellow-brown. (46) Branchlets not
glaucous. (47) Branchlets hairy. (48) Branchlets villous, or pilose. (49)
Branchlets hair sparse, or moderately dense, or very dense. (50) Branchlets
hair spreading. (51) Bud scale inner membrane free and separating from outer
membrane. (52) Stipules present. (55) Stipules leaf-like. (56) Stipules apex
acuminate, or acute. (58) Petioles 2-27 mm long. (59) Petioles convex to flat
in cross-section, or shallowly concave in cross-section. (60) Petioles
glabrous, or hairy. (61) Petioles adaxial surface villous. (62) Petioles
glandular dots at the base of the leaf absent, or glandular dots at the base
of the leaf present <sometimes>. (63) Juvenile leaves yellowish green. (64)
Juvenile leaves hairy. (65) Juvenile leaves lower surface villous, or pilose
<sometimes glabrous>. (66) Juvenile leaves hair sparse. (67) Juvenile leaves
white. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 23-100 cm long.
(90) Leaves 10-55 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades elliptic <narrowly to broadly
elliptic>, or obovate. (94) Leaf blades length-width ratio 1.2-3.6. (97) Leaf
blades herbaceous, or leathery. (103) Leaf blades stomata only on lower
surface. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface shiny. (107) Leaf blades adaxially
glabrous, or hairy, or glabrescent. (108) Leaf blades upper surface villous,
or pilose. (109) Leaf blades adaxial surface hairs moderately dense, or
sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white, or a mixture of white and
rust-colored. (111) Leaf blades abaxial surface glaucous. (112) Leaf blades
abaxial surface glabrous, or hairy, or glabrescent. (113) Leaf blades abaxial
surface pilose. (114) Leaf blades abaxial hairs sparse. (115) Leaf blades
abaxial surface hairs white, or hairs mixture of white and rust-colored. (116)
Leaf blades abaxial surface spreading. (117) Leaf blades abaxial surface
curved. (123) Leaf blades secondary veins protruding on adaxial and abaxial
surfaces. (124) Leaf blades secondary veins arising along midrib. (125) Leaf
bases acute, or cuneate, or obtuse <narrowly rounded>. (126) Leaf blades
revolute, or flat. (127) Leaf margins entire, or toothed. (128) Leaf margins
entire and glandular-dotted, or serrulate. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or
glands all around leaf <rarely only toward base>. (130) Leaf margins with 2-13
teeth or glands per cm <6>. (131) Leaf glands submarginal. (133) Leaf apices
acute <abruptly>, or obtuse. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (169) Catkins
flowering before the opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins one to several just
below tip of previous year's shoot. (171) Male catkins densely flowered. (172)
Male catkins 22-38 mm long. (173) Male catkins 16-20 mm wide. (174) Male
catkins stout. (175) Male catkins peduncles 0 mm long. (176) Male catkins
sessile. (177) Male catkins flowering branchlets 0 mm long. (178) Female
catkins densely flowered, or moderately densely flowered. (179) Female catkins
24-80 mm long. (180) Female catkins 13-19 mm wide. (181) Female catkins
slender, or stout. (182) Female catkins peduncles 0-7 mm long. (183) Female
catkins sessile. (184) Female catkins flowering branchlets 0 mm long. (195)
Flowers unisexual. (199) Floral bracts black, or brown. (201) Floral bracts
not reflexed. (203) Floral bracts widest at middle. (204) Floral bracts not
falling early. (205) Floral bracts 2.4-3.2 mm long. (207) Floral bracts hairy
all over. (208) Floral bracts hairs moderately dense. (209) Floral bracts
straight. (210) Floral bracts entire. (252) Perianth absent. (254) Sepals
absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 2. (281) Stamens filaments
glabrous. (282) Anthers purple becoming yellow. (283) Anthers ellipsoid, or
stout-cylindrical. (284) Anthers axis straight. (285) Anthers 0.5-0.8 mm long.
(287) Male flowers abaxial nectaries absent. (288) Male flowers adaxial
nectaries one. (289) Male flowers abaxial nectaries slender-rod. (290) Male
flowers adaxial nectaries 0.5-1.2 mm long. (297) Ovaries pear-shaped. (298)
Beak gradually tapering to style. (299) Ovaries glabrous <rarely sparsely
sericeous>. (306) Stipes 0.4-1 mm long. (310) Styles 1.6-2.8 mm long. (314)
Stigmas slender-cylindrical, or broad-cylindrical. (315) Stigmas lobes
0.32-0.86 mm long <0.63>. (317) Ovules 30-34 <rarely 20-40>. (318) Female
flowers abaxial nectaries absent. (319) Female flowers adaxial nectaries
unlobed. (320) Female flowers adaxial nectaries slender-rod. (321) Female
flowers adaxial nectaries rachis 0.6-1.1 mm long. (322) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries shorter than stipes <rarely equal>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327)
Fruit 4.5-6.8 mm long. (333) Fruit glabrous <rarely sparsely hairy>. (360) 2n
= 38. (361) Russia, Zhukova 1969, 1980; Zhukova & Petrovsky 1972; Petrovsky &
Zhukova 1983b. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 2x. (368) Northern hemisphere:
Canada, or United States, or Eurasia <Russia>. (369) Canada: B.C., or Man., or
N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.W.T. (Keew.), or N.W.T. (Mack.), or Yukon. (370) USA:
Alaska. (380) Forming thickets 0.3-1 m tall on calcareous or sometimes igneous
substrates. Growing on sand and gravel terraces, silty river beds, drumlin
fields, gravel ridges, cliff ledges, and snow beds. (429) REC.DATE: NOV 90,
NWT (CAN), MORPH: CAN, DIST. CAN QK MT. (431) Code used for graphics files:
wlsaric.


Salix uva-ursi <Pursh>

      (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (7) Salix arbuscula var. labradorica
(Anderss.) Anderss. Salix cutleri Tuckerman Salix cutleri var. labradorica
(Anderss.) Anderss. Salix ivigtutiana Lundstr. Salix myrsinites var.
parvifolia Lange. (9) Plants dioecious. (10) Plants less than 15 cm high. (11)
Plants 1-5 cm high. (12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants dwarf shrubs. (16) Plants
forming colonies by layering. (32) Stems prostrate. (40) Branches red-brown,
or gray-brown, or yellow-brown. (41) Branches not glaucous. (42) Branches
glabrous. (44) Branches epidermis not flaky, or flaky. (45) Branchlets
yellow-green, or yellow-brown. (46) Branchlets not glaucous. (47) Branchlets
glabrous. (48) Branchlets puberulent. (49) Branchlets hair sparse. (50)
Branchlets hair appressed, or fishhook-curved. (51) Bud scale inner membrane
fused to outer layer. (52) Stipules present, or absent. (55) Stipules
leaf-like, or scale-like or rudimentary. (56) Stipules apex acute. (58)
Petioles 2-6.5 mm long. (59) Petioles shallowly concave in cross-section, or
deeply concave in cross-section, but margins not covering the groove. (60)
Petioles glabrous. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the base of the leaf
absent. (63) Juvenile leaves yellowish green. (64) Juvenile leaves glabrous,
or hairy. (65) Juvenile leaves lower surface pilose, or puberulent. (66)
Juvenile leaves hair sparse. (67) Juvenile leaves white. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems. (89) Leaves 0.8-2.3 cm long. (90) Leaves 3.5-10
mm wide. (93) Leaf blades obovate <to broadly obovate>, or oblanceolate, or
elliptic. (94) Leaf blades length-width ratio 1.7-3.6. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous, or leathery. (103) Leaf blades stomata on both upper and lower
surfaces, or stomata on upper surface only present along veins or at apex, or
stomata only on lower surface. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface shiny, or
highly glossy. (107) Leaf blades adaxially glabrous, or hairy. (108) Leaf
blades upper surface puberulent, or long-silky. (109) Leaf blades adaxial
surface hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white. (111) Leaf blades
abaxial surface glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface glabrous. (123)
Leaf blades secondary veins protruding on adaxial and abaxial surfaces. (124)
Leaf blades secondary veins arising along midrib. (125) Leaf bases cuneate, or
obtuse, or acute. (126) Leaf blades flat. (127) Leaf margins entire, or
toothed. (128) Leaf margins entire and serrulate, or crenate, or
glandular-dotted, or entire. (129) Leaf margins with teeth or glands toward
apex only, or all around leaf. (130) Leaf margins with 4-10 teeth or glands
per cm. (131) Leaf glands marginal. (133) Leaf apices retuse, or acute, or
rounded. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (169) Catkins flowering with the
opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins one to several just below tip of previous
year's shoot. (171) Male catkins densely flowered. (172) Male catkins 6-17 mm
long. (173) Male catkins 5-8 mm wide. (174) Male catkins stout, or subglobose.
(175) Male catkins peduncles 1-6 mm long. (176) Male catkins borne on a
flowering branchlet. (177) Male catkins flowering branchlets 0.5-9 mm long.
(178) Female catkins densely flowered. (179) Female catkins 8-39 mm long.
(180) Female catkins 6-10 mm wide. (181) Female catkins slender, or stout, or
subglobose. (182) Female catkins peduncles 1.5-10 mm long. (183) Female
catkins borne on a flowering branchlet. (184) Female catkins flowering
branchlets 2-10 mm long. (195) Flowers unisexual. (199) Floral bracts brown,
or black, or tawny, or light rose. (201) Floral bracts not reflexed. (203)
Floral bracts widest at middle, or widest toward tip. (204) Floral bracts not
falling early. (205) Floral bracts 1.1-1.8 mm long. (207) Floral bracts hairy
all over, or glabrous. (208) Floral bracts hairs sparse. (209) Floral bracts
straight, or wavy. (210) Floral bracts entire. (252) Perianth absent. (254)
Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 1 <rarely two>. (281)
Stamens filaments glabrous. (282) Anthers purple becoming yellow, or reddish
becoming yellow. (283) Anthers ellipsoid, or stout-cylindrical. (284) Anthers
axis straight, or axis twisted. (285) Anthers 0.4-0.7 mm long. (287) Male
flowers abaxial nectaries absent. (288) Male flowers adaxial nectaries one.
(289) Male flowers abaxial nectaries slender-rod, or broad-rod. (290) Male
flowers adaxial nectaries 0.6-0.9 mm long. (297) Ovaries ovate, or
pear-shaped. (298) Beak gradually tapering to style. (299) Ovaries glabrous.
(306) Stipes 0.32-1.6 mm long. (310) Styles 0.48-1 mm long. (314) Stigmas
slender-cylindrical, or broad-cylindrical. (315) Stigmas lobes 0.1-0.4 mm long
<0.23>. (317) Ovules 6-10. (318) Female flowers abaxial nectaries absent.
(319) Female flowers adaxial nectaries unlobed. (320) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries slender-rod, or broad-rod. (321) Female flowers adaxial nectaries
rachis 0.5-0.8 mm long. (322) Female flowers adaxial nectaries shorter than
stipes, or longer than stipes. (325) Fruit a capsule. (327) Fruit 3-5 mm long.
(333) Fruit glabrous. (360) 2n = 38. (361) Jorgensen, Sorensen, & Westergaard
1958, Löve & Löve 1966. (363) Ploidy levels recorded 2x. (368) Northern
hemisphere: Greenland, or St. Pierre and Miquelon, or Canada, or United
States. (369) Canada: Lab., or N.B., or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.S., or
Que. (370) USA: Maine, or N.H., or N.York, or Vt. (380) A dwarf shrub forming
mats on exposed, often dry or moist, calcareous and granitic rocks, boulders,
gravel, and sand on beaches, outcrops, and snow beds. (384) Lvs marcescent,
sometimes skeletonized. (429) REC.DATE: 22 SEP 92, 8 JAN 97, MORPH: CAN DAO,
DIST.: CAN QK MT. (431) Code used for graphics files: wlsauv.


Salix vestita <Pursh>

      (1) Rock willow. (2) Salicaceae, willow family. (4) Fl. Amer. Sept. 2:
610. 1814. (7) Salix leiolepis Fernald Salix vestita var. leiolepis
(Fernald)Argus Salix vestita var. erecta Andersson Salix vestita var.
psilophylla Fernald & H. St. John. (9) Plants dioecious. (10) Plants more than
15 cm high. (11) Plants 2-15 cm high. (12) Plants shrubs. (13) Plants low
shrubs, or mid shrubs. (16) Plants not colonial. (32) Stems erect. (40)
Branches red-brown, or brownish. (41) Branches not glaucous. (42) Branches
hairy, or glabrous, or glabrescent. (43) Branches villous, or long-silky. (44)
Branches epidermis not flaky. (45) Branchlets yellow-brown, or gray-brown.
(46) Branchlets not glaucous. (47) Branchlets hairy. (48) Branchlets villous.
(49) Branchlets hair sparse, or moderately dense. (50) Branchlets hair
spreading. (51) Bud scale inner membrane free but not separating from outer
membrane. (52) Stipules present. (55) Stipules scale-like or rudimentary. (57)
Petioles present. (58) Petioles 2-8 mm long. (59) Petioles shallowly concave
in cross-section, or deeply concave in cross-section, but margins not covering
the groove. (60) Petioles hairy, or glabrous, or glabrescent. (61) Petioles
adaxial surface puberulent. (62) Petioles glandular dots at the base of the
leaf present <sometimes dark>, or glandular dots at the base of the leaf
absent. (63) Juvenile leaves yellowish green. (64) Juvenile leaves hairy. (65)
Juvenile leaves lower surface long-silky. (66) Juvenile leaves hair very
dense. (67) Juvenile leaves white, or gray. (84) Leaves alternate. (89) Leaves
1.8-6.7 cm long. (90) Leaves 1-4 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades elliptic <broadly
ellpitic>, or circular, or obovate. (94) Leaf blades length-width ratio
1.1-2.3. (97) Leaf blades leathery. (103) Leaf blades stomata only on lower
surface. (104) Leaf blades adaxial surface shiny. (107) Leaf blades adaxially
glabrous, or hairy. (108) Leaf blades upper surface long-silky. (109) Leaf
blades adaxial surface hairs sparse. (110) Leaf blades upper surface white.
(111) Leaf blades abaxial surface glaucous. (112) Leaf blades abaxial surface
hairy. (113) Leaf blades abaxial surface villous, or long-silky. (114) Leaf
blades abaxial hairs moderately dense, or hairs very dense, or hairs sparse.
(115) Leaf blades abaxial surface hairs white. (116) Leaf blades abaxial
surface appressed, or spreading. (117) Leaf blades abaxial surface straight.
(123) Leaf blades secondary veins impressed into adaxial surface, protruding
on abaxial surface <strongly impressed>. (124) Leaf blades secondary veins
arising along midrib. (125) Leaf bases obtuse, or rounded <sometimes truncate
to subcordate>. (126) Leaf blades revolute. (127) Leaf margins entire, or
toothed. (128) Leaf margins entire and crenate <to subentire>. (129) Leaf
margins with teeth or glands all around leaf. (130) Leaf margins with 3-12
teeth or glands per cm. (131) Leaf glands marginal. (133) Leaf apices rounded,
or retuse. (151) Inflorescence a catkin. (169) Catkins flowering with the
opening of leaf buds. (170) Catkins terminal on previous year's shoot. (171)
Male catkins densely flowered. (172) Male catkins 10-30(-42) mm long. (173)
Male catkins 4-6.5(-8) mm wide. (174) Male catkins slender, or stout. (175)
Male catkins peduncles 3-8 mm long. (176) Male catkins borne on a flowering
branchlet <terminating normal vegetative shoots>. (177) Male catkins flowering
branchlets 3-31 mm long. (178) Female catkins densely flowered. (179) Female
catkins 10-53 mm long. (180) Female catkins 4-10 mm wide. (181) Female catkins
slender, or stout. (182) Female catkins peduncles 4-12 mm long. (183) Female
catkins borne on a flowering branchlet <terminating normal vegetative shoots>.
(184) Female catkins flowering branchlets 3-27 mm long. (195) Flowers
unisexual. (199) Floral bracts tawny. (203) Floral bracts widest at middle, or
widest toward tip. (204) Floral bracts not falling early. (205) Floral bracts
0.8-1.6 mm long. (207) Floral bracts hairy all over. (208) Floral bracts hairs
very dense. (209) Floral bracts straight. (210) Floral bracts entire. (252)
Perianth absent. (254) Sepals absent. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 2.
(278) Stamens free. (281) Stamens filaments hairy on lower half. (282) Anthers
purple becoming yellow. (283) Anthers ellipsoid, or subglobose. (284) Anthers
axis straight. (285) Anthers 0.3-0.5 mm long. (287) Male flowers abaxial
nectaries one. (288) Male flowers adaxial nectaries one. (289) Male flowers
abaxial nectaries slender-rod. (290) Male flowers adaxial nectaries 0.5-1.2 mm
long. (291) Male flowers nectaries separate, or cup-shaped. (297) Ovaries
pear-shaped, or inverse turnip-shaped. (298) Beak abruptly tapering to style.
(299) Ovaries hairy. (300) Ovaries short-silky. (301) Hairs dense. (302)
White. (303) Appressed, or spreading. (304) Straight, or wavy. (305)
Cylindrical. (306) Stipes 0.4-1.2 mm long. (308) Styles partially fused
<almost free to base>. (310) Styles 0.2-0.4 mm long. (314) Stigmas
broad-cylindrical. (315) Stigmas lobes 0.2-0.36 mm long. (317) Ovules 12-14.
(318) Female flowers abaxial nectaries one. (319) Female flowers adaxial
nectaries unlobed. (320) Female flowers adaxial nectaries slender-rod, or
broad-rod, or ovate <almost filiform>. (321) Female flowers adaxial nectaries
rachis 0.7-1.4 mm long. (322) Female flowers adaxial nectaries shorter than
stipes, or equal to stipes, or longer than stipes. (323) Female flowers
nectaries separate, or partially connected <cup-shaped>. (325) Fruit a
capsule. (327) Fruit 3-5 mm long. (333) Fruit hairy. (360) 2n = 38. (361) Dorn
1975, Hedberg 1967, Löve & Löve 1975, 1982, Taylor and Brockman 1966. (363)
Ploidy levels recorded 2x. (364) Amphi-Beringian. (365) Low arctic. (366) Of
limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (368) Northern hemisphere: Canada,
or United States, or Eurasia. (369) Canada: Alta., or B.C., or Lab., or Man.,
or Nfld., or N.W.T. (Frank.), or N.S., or Ont., or Que. (370) USA: Mont., or
Oreg., or Wash. <?>. (371) Arctic Islands: <Akpatok I.>. (380) In reporting
this species from the Arctic Archipelago Polunin (1940) writes, "Rare even on
Akpatok [Island], where is occurs in shletered valleys that have a good
snow-covering in winter, growing best in damp "late-snow" depressions, but
even then remaining more or less prostrate.". (384) Buds sometimes glaucous.
Catkins rarely not terminating a vegetative shoot. (429) REC.DATE: 13 Aug 92,
25 Oct 98 MORPH: Argus 1983, 1991 CAN DAO, DIST.: CAN QK MT. (431) Code used
for graphics files: wlsave.


Saxifragaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Saxifrage family. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (9) Plants
monoecious <S. eschscholtzii>, or bisexual. (11) Plants 1-30 cm high <mean 10
cm>. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed, or tufted, or
cushion-like, or matted. (17) Plants vegetatively proliferating by bulbils, or
not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18) Taproot present <occasionally,
S. serpyllifolia, S. tricuspidata>, or absent <usually>. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems, or
without easily seen horizontal stems <usually>. (22) Plants stoloniferous <S.
flagellaris>, or rhizomatous <Chrysosplenium, S. rivularis>. (32) Stems erect,
or decumbent <less commonly>. (36) Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy, or
densely hairy. (52) Stipules absent, or present. (53) Stipules not sheathing.
(55) Stipules scale-like or rudimentary. (57) Petioles absent, or present.
(58) Petioles 0-50 mm long <mean 14 mm>. (82) Leaves evergreen, or deciduous,
or marcescent. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette, or mostly basal, or distributed
along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate <usually>, or opposite <S.
oppositifolia>. (86) Leaves heterophyllous <varying between the basal leaves
and leaves on the flowering stems>, or not heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple.
(88) Leaves lobed, or not lobed. (89) Leaves 2-70 cm long <mean 13 mm>. (90)
Leaves 0.4-35 mm wide <mean 7 mm>. (93) Leaf blades elliptic, or linear, or
lanceolate, or oblanceolate, or oblong, or ovate, or obovate, or circular, or
spatulate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or leathery, or succulent. (105) Leaf
blades glabrous <usually>, or hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs on the
adaxial, or with hairs on the abaxial, or with hairs equally dense on both
surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs glandular <usually>. (119) Leaf blade
venation pinnate <usually>, or palmate <Chrysosplenium, Saxifraga cernua and
S. rivularis>. (125) Leaf bases cordate, or truncate, or obtuse, or acute, or
cuneate, or attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (132) Leaf margins with hairs,
or without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute, or obtuse, or acuminate, or
rounded. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present, or absent. (135) Flowering
stems without leaves, or with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy <usually>,
or glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 0.5-18 cm long <mean 6 cm>. (146)
Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers solitary, or in
inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal, or axillary. (151) Inflorescence
spicate, or racemose, or paniculate, or cymose, or head-like. (159)
Inflorescence with bulbils, or without bulbils. (160) Inflorescence 0-3 cm
long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 1-15. (193) Flowers small, less than 5
mm in diameter or length, or medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length.
(195) Flowers unisexual, or bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic. (254)
Sepals present. (255) Sepals 4 <rarely>, or 5 <usually>. (256) Sepals free.
(258) Sepals green <usually>, or yellow, or purple, or red. (259) Sepals
hairy, or glabrous. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals green, or
white, or yellow, or red, or pink, or purple. (269) Petals with contrasting
markings, or without contrasting markings. (270) Petals elliptic, or ovate, or
obovate, or lanceolate, or oblanceolate, or spatulate. (271) Petals unlobed.
(272) Petals 1-12 mm long <mean 5 mm>. (274) Petals same length as the calyx,
or longer than the calyx <more commonly>. (276) Corolla rotate. (277) Stamens
4-10 <4-8 Chrysosplenium, 5 stamens plus 5 staminoidia, Parnassia, 10 stamens,
Saxifraga 10 stamens>. (278) Stamens free, or fused <rarely>. (279) Stamens
filament all equal in length. (280) Stamens free of the corolla. (293) Carpels
syncarpous, or partly fused. (295) Carpels 2 <usually>, or 4 <Parnasia>. (296)
Ovary superior, or partly inferior, or inferior. (307) Styles present. (308)
Styles free. (309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas per style 2-4. (316) Placentation
axile. (317) Ovules 25-120. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit spherical, or
ellipsoid, or ovoid, or of an unusual shape. (327) Fruit 0.3-12 mm long <mean
6 mm>. (328) Fruit 2-12 mm wide <mean 5 mm>. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit black, or brown, or purple, or green at maturity. (333)
Fruit hairy <rarely>, or glabrous <usually>. (334) Fruit calyx persisting
<usually>, or calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting <usually>,
or styles not persistent. (356) Seeds 25-50. (357) Seeds 0.5-6 mm long <mean
1.3 mm>. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth, or verrucose, or ridged, or
winged. (364) Circumpolar <commonly>, or amphi-Atlantic, or amphi-Beringian,
or North American. (365) Arctic, or low arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging
in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common, or rare, or uncommon. (373) Substrate
type: acidic <rarely>, or calcareous <commonly>, or nitrophilous. (374) Moist
areas, or rocky sites, or clay. (384) Warming (1909) documented five
growth-forms among Arctic Saxifragaceae. 1. Species with leaves in a rosette:
S. hieracifolia and S. nivalis. These species he considered to have a vertical
rhizome. The primary root dies early and numerous adventitious roots develop.
New shoots develop in the axils of the upper leaves. 2. Species with vertical
rhizomes, foliage leaves in a loose rosette, bulbils or runners with scale
leaves or reduced foliage leaves, and adventitious roots: Chrysosplenium, S.
cernua, S. hirculus, and S. rivularis. 3. Species in which the main stem is
vertical and bears a close rosette of leaves and many adventitious roots. The
stem dies away completely after flowering. Lateral shoots arise from the
leaf-axils in no fixed order and develop more or less horizontally along the
ground for some distance, terminating in a new rosette, e.g. S. paniculata and
S. flagellaris. 4. Species with a many headed rhizome and a primary root that
remains alive for a long time. Adventitious roots are few in number, and
vegetative propagation is by lateral shoots becoming independent: S. cespitosa
and S. tricuspidata. 5. Creeping herb species in which the shoots are
prostrate and have their internodes more or less elongated, with a primary
root that appears to be able to live several years: S. eschscholtzii, S.
oppositifolia, and S. aizoides. The following species have been noted as
evergreen but not to the same extent: S. aizoides, S. aizoon, S. cespitosa, S.
hieracifolia, S. nivalis, S. oppositifolia, and S. tricuspidata. Old dead
leaves persist for a long time especially on those species that belong to dry
habitats, e.g., S. cespitosa, S. hieracifolia, S. nivalis, and S.
oppositifolia. Flowers develop the year previous to that in which they open in
S. cespitosa, S. hieracifolia, S. nivalis, S. oppositifolia, S. rivularis, and
possibly all species. Staminate flowers occur rarely in S. oppositifolia, but
pistillate flowers, which are smaller than the hermaphroditic ones, appear to
be common in several species. Stamens are present, but smaller than usual and
not fully developed. Normal flowers have ten anthers and two carpels, but
other numbers have been observed, for example, 6 and 7-merous gynoecia in S.
cernua. Tri-merous gynoecia have been found in S. aizoides, S. cespitosa and
S. tricuspidata, and 4- and 5-merous in S. oppositifolia. The flowers have
nectar secreted at the base of the gynoecium, and in some instances scent has
been noted. Protandy, the maturation of the stamens before the stigmas, has
been observed in Chrysosplenium, S. aizoides, S. paniculata, S. cespitosa, S.
cernua, S. hieracifolia, S. hirculus, S. nivalis, S. rivularis, and S.
tricuspidata. Protogyny, the ripening of the stigmas before the anthers,
occurs in S. cernua, S. cespitosa, S. hieracifolia, and S. nivalis, but only
slightly. However, S. oppositifolia is distinctly protogynous. Self
pollination is uncommon, but may occur when anthers touch stigmas. Fruit set
and seed formation is common in many species. Seed ripens, in most species but
possibly not every year in every locality. Those that do not set seed at all,
or do so rarely, are S. cernua and S. rivularis that primarily propagate
vegetatively. How common fruit-setting is in S. foliolosa, S. flagellaris and
S. hirculus requires further investigation. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae.
(387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales.
(406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Dilleniales.
(413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae.
(419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (421) 580 species. (422) 30 genera.
(423) Genera in study region: Chrysosplenium, Parnassia, Saxifraga. (425)
Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: sx.


Chrysosplenium tetrandrum <(Lund) Fries>

      (1) Golden saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (4) Bot. Not.
1838: 193. (8) Chrysosplenium alternifolium L. subsp. tetrandrum (Lund)
Hultén. Chrysosplenium alternifolium var. tetrandrum Lund Chrysosplenium
rosendahlii Packer. (11) Plants (1.5-)3-10(-17) cm high. (14) Plants perennial
herbs <“golden”, but often green>. (15) Plants matted <loosely>. (21) Plants
with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous. (32) Stems erect, or
decumbent. (36) Stems glabrous. (57) Petioles present, or absent. (58)
Petioles (0-)0.2-2.5 mm long <lower leaves with long petioles, upper leaves
with short petioles or sessile>. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves
distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (88)
Leaves lobed <with 3-7 shallow lobes>. (89) Leaves 3-12(-17) cm long. (90)
Leaves 6-15(-20) mm wide. (93) Leaf blades circular, or reniform. (105) Leaf
blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation palmate, or inconspicuous. (125)
Leaf bases cordate, or truncate <commonly>, or obtuse <below the
inflorescence>. (133) Leaf apices rounded. (135) Flowering stems with leaves.
(136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 1-8(-10) cm long. (151)
Inflorescence cymose, or head-like <flowers small, inconspicuous, and
clustered in the axils of upper leaves>. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-3 cm long.
(192) Flowers per inflorescence 4-10. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in
diameter or length. (255) Sepals 4. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals green, or
yellow. (259) Sepals glabrous. (265) Petals absent. (277) Stamens 4 <6-8,
opposite the sepals>. (278) Stamens free <anthers tiny, approx. 0.5 mm long>.
(294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary inferior. (308)
Styles free. (309) Styles 2 <very short>. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316)
Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 25-50. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit
spherical <inverted deltoid>. (327) Fruit 3-6 mm long. (328) Fruit (3-)4-6 mm
wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit green at maturity
<or the same colour as leaves that turn “golden”, or yellow-green>. (334)
Fruit calyx persisting. (356) Seeds 25-50. (357) Seeds 0.6-1 mm long. (358)
Seeds brown <brownish red>. (359) Seeds smooth <shiny>. (360) 2n = 48. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Ellesmere, Cornwallis,
Banks, Victoria, Prince of Wales, King William <Eglinton, Southampton, Coats
and Digges>. (373) Substrate type: nitrophilous. (374) Moist areas <often
growing in soil enriched by animal manure, near animal dens>. (380) Warming
(1909) considered that self-pollination in this species is probably very
common in Greenland and takes place by stamens bending inwards and styles
bending outwards so that stamens and stigmas come in contact. Two lateral
stamens are rarely involved, and are sometimes observed to be rudimentary.
Fruit setting usually occurs and quantities of seed are produced. In our area,
the species flowers and fruits abundantly, even in the Far North where it may
be only 2-3 cm high (Polunin 1940). (381) The presence of this species is
indicative of nitrophilous conditions either from animal or human activity.
The northernmost record is Floraberget, approx. 80°3'N in Murchisonfjord,
North-East Land, Spitsbergen Archipelago. The northernmost record in Canada is
Ellesmere Island, Seagull Rock, 76°28'N (CAN). (382) Frequently found at Thule
sites, inside collapsed stone burials and meat caches. (384) Polunin (1940)
recognized the taxon as Chrysosplenium alternifolium var. tetrandrum
indicating that he considered the typical variety to have 6-8 anthers and to
be absent from eastern North America. He claimed that all Canadian Arctic
Archipelago material belongs to the well-marked variety having only four
stamens and smaller and more rounded leaves with fewer crenations. Porsild
(1957) used the name C. tetrandrum and noted that the number of stamens in
Canadian Arctic material is usually 4, but not uncommonly 6 or 8. Packer
(1962) described C. rosendahlii Packer based on type material collected on
Somerset Island but this was not taken up by Scoggan (1978). Packer (1962)
provided the following key to distinguish the species he recognized ’ Sepals
more or less equal; stamens 4; seeds 0.7 mm...C. tetrandrum ’ Sepals unequal,
the outer pair broader; stamens in some flowers at least more than 4; seeds
about 1 mm. (385) Porsild (1957, 1964) and Porsild and Cody (1980) used this
name. Polunin (1940) called the taxon in our area Chrysosplenium
alterniflorium var. tetrandrum (Lund) Beretn. Packer (1962) described C.
rosendahlii Packer based on type material collected on Somerset Island but
this was synonymized, with this taxon, by Scoggan (1978). (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order
Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Dilleniales <?>. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order
Saxifragales. (431) Code used for graphics files: sxchte.


Parnassia kotzebuei <Cham. & Schlecht.>

      (1) Grass-of-parnassus. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (4) Linnaea
1: 549. 1826. (8) Parnassia kotzebuei var. pumila C. L. Hitchc. & Ownbey. (11)
Plants 5-10(-20) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted, or
single-stemmed. (18) Taproot present <short>, or absent. (32) Stems erect
<condensed>. (36) Stems glabrous. (58) Petioles 2-10 mm long <upper leaves
sometimes sub-sessile>. (82) Leaves marcescent. (83) Leaves in a basal
rosette. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 0.5-1.2 cm
long. (90) Leaves 4-10 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades ovate. (97) Leaf blades
succulent. (105) Leaf blades glabrous <with surface glands>. (119) Leaf blade
venation trinerved. (125) Leaf bases obtuse, or attenuate. (133) Leaf apices
obtuse. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes absent <small surface glands present>.
(135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145)
Flowering stem 3-10 cm long. (149) Flowers solitary. (193) Flowers
medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals
free. (258) Sepals green. (259) Sepals glabrous. (261) Sepals herbaceous.
(266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white. (270) Petals ovate, or
elliptic. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 4-7 mm long. (274) Petals longer
than the calyx, or same length as the calyx. (276) Corolla cup-like. (277)
Stamens (3-)5-8(-10) <with staminoidia: thin scales that are entire or with
gland-tipped segments>. (278) Stamens free. (295) Carpels 2-4. (296) Ovary
superior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas per style 1-2.
(316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 100-120 <approx.>. (325) Fruit a
capsule. (326) Fruit spherical. (327) Fruit 6-12 mm long. (328) Fruit 6-12 mm
wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown <pale>. (334)
Fruit calyx persisting. (356) Seeds 100-120 <approx.>. (357) Seeds 0.4-0.6 mm
long. (358) Seeds brown <orangish>. (359) Seeds smooth and winged <wing with
reticulate markings>. (364) North American. (365) Low arctic, or alpine. (366)
Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands <extending to western Greenland and
northeastern Asia across the subarctic and boreal regions from southern
Greenland and Baffin to Alaska>. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin,
Banks, and Victoria. (374) Moist areas <often beside lakes and creeks>, or
snow beds. (380) This species appears always to flower and ripen seed
plentifully, (Polunin 1940). (381) The occurrence of this species is
indicative of damp depressions such as lake shores and snow patch areas.
Polunin (1940) reported the northernmost record as being from the Yukon,
Herschel Island, 69°34'N. Since then more northerly records have been
collected in the N.W.T. from Banks and Victoria Islands. The Banks Island
collection is from Egg River, 72°27'N (CAN). (384) Polunin (1940) commented
that “although this species is in places quite frequent, it does not appear to
have been properly recorded from within the Arctic Islands. It is generally
around 10 cm in height in the late flowering or fruiting condition, but varies
somewhat in the size and robustness of the leaves and in the length of the
petals, which are said to equal the calyx lobes, but which in some of my
otherwise perfectly ‘good’ specimens, exceed the calyx-lobes by as much as one
third”. This name was used by Polunin (1940), Porsild (1957, 1964), and
Porsild and Cody (1980). (385) This name was used by Polunin (1940), Porsild
(1957, 1964), and Porsild and Cody (1980). (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387)
Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406)
Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Dilleniales <?>.
(414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales.
(431) Code used for graphics files: sxpako.


Parnassia palustris <L.> var. neogaea <Fernald>

      (1) Bog star. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (4) Rhodora 29: 311.
1937. (8) =Parnassia multiseta (Lebd.) Fern. (380) Similar to Parnassia
kotzebuei but the flowers are much larger, with broader and longer petals and
the cauline leaf inserted near the middle of the stem. (381) Discovery of this
species in the Arctic Archipelago could indicate climatic warming, as it
occurs near Banks Island in the Anderson River delta, but has not yet been
recorded in the archipelago. The northernmost record is N.W.T., Anderson River
Delta, 69°42'N (CAN). (384) Polunin (1940) noted that one collection belonging
to this species has been made on the West Coast of Hudson Bay at Cape Eskimo.
The species is plentiful only very slightly further south on both sides of
Hudson Bay, and here varies greatly (even in closely contiguous plants within
the same stand) in such characters as the size of the petals and the number of
setae to each staminodal scale; also in the total height, which may be
anywhere from less than 10 to more than 30 cm. Polunin (1940), Porsild (1957,
1964) and Porsild and Cody (1980) considered this a low arctic species which
occurs abundantly near the Arctic Archipelago. It should be looked for in the
archipelago. (385) Polunin (1940), Porsild (1957, 1964) and Porsild and Cody
(1980) considered this a low arctic species which occurs abundantly near the
Arctic Archipelago. It should be looked for in the archipelago. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (426) Not accepted in this study. (431) Code
used for graphics files: sxpapa.


Saxifraga <L.>

      (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (9) Plants monoecious <rarely S.
eschscholtzii>, or bisexual. (11) Plants 1-30 cm high <mean 11 cm>. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed, or tufted, or
cushion-like, or matted, or in basal rosettes. (17) Plants vegetatively
proliferating by bulbils, or not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (18)
Taproot present <rarely>, or absent. (21) Plants with conspicuously long
horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems, or without easily seen
horizontal stems <usually>. (22) Plants stoloniferous <S. flagellaris>, or
rhizomatous <S. rivularis>. (32) Stems erect, or decumbent. (36) Stems
glabrous, or sparsely hairy, or densely hairy. (52) Stipules present, or
absent. (53) Stipules not sheathing. (55) Stipules scale-like or rudimentary.
(57) Petioles absent, or present. (58) Petioles 0-50 mm long <mean 17 mm>.
(82) Leaves evergreen, or deciduous, or marcescent. (83) Leaves in a basal
rosette, or mostly basal, or distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves
alternate, or opposite. (86) Leaves heterophyllous, or not heterophyllous.
(87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves lobed, or not lobed. (89) Leaves 2-70 cm long
<mean 13 mm>. (90) Leaves 0.4-35 mm wide <mean 7 mm>. (93) Leaf blades
elliptic, or linear, or lanceolate, or oblanceolate, or oblong, or ovate, or
obovate, or circular, or spatulate, or reniform. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous,
or leathery, or succulent. (105) Leaf blades glabrous, or hairy. (106) Leaf
blades with hairs on the adaxial, or with hairs on the abaxial, or with hairs
equally dense on both surfaces. (119) Leaf blade venation palmate <S. cernua>,
or appearing single-veined, or inconspicuous. (125) Leaf bases cordate, or
obtuse, or acute, or cuneate, or attenuate. (126) Leaf blades flat. (132) Leaf
margins with hairs, or without hairs. (133) Leaf apices acute, or obtuse, or
acuminate, or rounded. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present, or absent. (135)
Flowering stems without leaves, or with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy,
or glabrous. (145) Flowering stem 0.5-18 cm long <mean 6 mm>. (146)
Inflorescence without involucral bracts. (149) Flowers solitary, or in
inflorescences. (150) Inflorescence terminal, or axillary. (151) Inflorescence
spicate, or racemose, or paniculate, or cymose, or head-like. (159)
Inflorescence with bulbils, or without bulbils. (160) Inflorescence 0-3 cm
long <mean 1.3 mm>. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 1-15. (193) Flowers small,
less than 5 mm in diameter or length, or medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or
length. (195) Flowers unisexual, or bisexual. (196) Flowers actinomorphic.
(254) Sepals present. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals green,
or purple, or red. (259) Sepals hairy, or glabrous. (261) Sepals herbaceous,
or scarious. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals green, or white,
or yellow, or red, or pink, or purple. (269) Petals with contrasting markings,
or without contrasting markings. (270) Petals elliptic, or ovate, or obovate,
or lanceolate, or oblanceolate, or spatulate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272)
Petals 1-12 mm long <mean 5.2 mm>. (274) Petals same length as the calyx, or
longer than the calyx. (276) Corolla cup-like. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens
free, or fused <rarely>. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (280)
Stamens free of the corolla. (293) Carpels syncarpous, or partly fused
<usually>. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior, or partly inferior. (307)
Styles absent, or present. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas
per style 1. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 10-100. (325) Fruit a
capsule. (326) Fruit spherical, or ellipsoid, or ovoid, or of an unusual
shape. (327) Fruit 2.5-12 mm long <mean 5.8 mm>. (328) Fruit 2-7 mm wide <mean
4.5 mm>. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit black, or brown,
or purple, or green at maturity. (333) Fruit hairy, or glabrous. (334) Fruit
calyx persisting, or calyx not persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting, or
styles not persistent. (356) Seeds 10-100. (357) Seeds 0.5-1.5 mm long <mean
9.5 mm>. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth, or verrucose, or ridged, or
winged. (364) Circumpolar, or amphi-Atlantic, or amphi-Beringian, or North
American. (365) Arctic, or alpine <and boreal>. (366) Wide-ranging in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Common, or rare, or uncommon. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order
Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (425) Genus. (431) Code used
for graphics files: sxsx.


Saxifraga aizoides <L.>

      (1) Yellow mountain saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (4)
Sp. Pl. 1: 403. 1753. (8) Leptasea aizoides (L.) Haw. Saxifraga van-Bruntiae
Small. (11) Plants (1.5-)3-10 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15)
Plants tufted, or matted. (17) Plants vegetatively proliferating by bulbils
<from lateral shoots that become independent>. (21) Plants with conspicuously
long horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous <rhizomesrarely collected; the
primary root dies after a few years and the plants spread by means of creeping
stems that have slender adventitious roots>. (36) Stems sparsely hairy <seen
at 10-40X>. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves evergreen, or marcescent <the
late season leaves remain green during the winter; fresh leaves gradually die
and persist on the stem a long time>. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems.
(84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 0.3-1.1 cm long. (90)
Leaves 1.5-3 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades lanceolate, or oblong. (97) Leaf blades
succulent. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
inconspicuous. (125) Leaf bases <decurrent>. (132) Leaf margins with hairs
<sparse, glandular>. (133) Leaf apices obtuse, or acuminate. (134) Conspicuous
hydathodes present <usually one at the leaf apex on the upper surface,
occasionally 2-3 along the leaf margins>. (135) Flowering stems with leaves.
(136) Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 1-7 cm long. (149) Flowers
solitary <usually in the Arctic Archipelago>, or in inflorescences. (151)
Inflorescence racemose <if applicable>. (160) Inflorescence 0-1 cm long. (192)
Flowers per inflorescence 1-4 <rarely 3 or 4>. (193) Flowers medium-sized,
5-15 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals
green. (259) Sepals glabrous. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals
yellow. (269) Petals with contrasting markings <living plants>, or without
contrasting markings <that fade in herbarium specimens>. (270) Petals obovate.
(271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 4-6 mm long. (274) Petals longer than the
calyx, or same length as the calyx. (276) Corolla cup-like. (277) Stamens 10.
(278) Stamens free. (293) Carpels partly fused. (295) Carpels 2 <rarely 3>.
(296) Ovary superior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2(-3). (313) Stigmas per
style 1. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 50-100 <approx.>. (325) Fruit
a capsule. (326) Fruit of an unusual shape <comprising 2 or 3 partly fused
flattened ovoid carpels with divergent styles>. (327) Fruit 2.5-3.5 mm long.
(328) Fruit 5.5-6 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit
brown. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356)
Seeds 50-100 <approximately>. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds hairy <at 10X,
minutely tuberculate seen at 40X>. (360) 2n = 26. (364) Amphi-Atlantic <from
the Yukon east to Europe>. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the
Arctic Islands <The species has been more widely mapped in the Arctic
Archipelago since Porsild (1964), but it is relatively uncommon. Hulten (1968)
described this species as occuring from ‘Lapland, Steiermark, Westmoreland and
Monte Baldo, northern Italy’>. (367) Uncommon. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin,
Ellesmere, Banks, and Victoria. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Moist
areas <often along streams>. (380) Insect pollination appears to be the rule
(Warming 1909). This author reported that, in Greenland, the flowers of this
species are distinctly protandrous. At first the stamens are widely outspread,
but afterwards they bend inwards in succession. All the stamens are again
widely outspread and have more or less emptied their pollen when the styles
spread out and the stigmas open. There is a short time when the anthers and
stigmas are both functional. The nectary consists of a massive, ring-shaped
swelling around the base of the styles, on the finely pitted surface of which
numerous drops of nectar may be seen. In Canada, flowering is plentiful and
seed always ripens (Polunin 1940). (381) Polunin (1940) considered this as
“the one species that alone is a sure sign of the presence of calcium
carbonate in appreciable quantity, at least in the Arctic”. He reported the
northernmost record as Spitsbergen, 79°55'N. It has since been collected in
Canada on Ellesmere Island at Borup Fiord, 80°49'N (CAN). (384) Polunin (1940)
commented that “unlike most other members of the genus, and in spite of the
fact that Engler and Irmscher (1919, p. 466) introduce it as ‘Typus
polymorphus S. aizoides’, this species does not appear to vary much in our
area, where it grows generally as a loose mat or tuft about 6 (4-10) cm high
... It seems to be as strongly calciphilous as any species; indeed having now
for several years past made a point of testing the soil around the roots of
specimens met in ordinarily acidic country in the north, and having never yet
failed to find at least some scraps that would effervesce strongly with HCl”.
This species has been more widely mapped in our area since Porsild (1964).
(385) This species has been more widely mapped in our area since Porsild
(1964). (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae.
(394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae.
(410) Cronquist's Order Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: sxsxaz.


Saxifraga cernua <L.>

      (1) Nodding saxifrage, bulblet saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage
family. (4) Sp. Pl. 1: 403. 1753. (8) Saxifraga var. exilioides Polunin, Bull.
Mus. Natl. 92: 254. 1940. Saxifraga cernua subsp. exilioides (Simm.) Engl. &
Irmsch. emend Porsild, Bull. Mus. Natl. 135: 135. 1955. Saxifraga cernua forma
latibracteata (Fern. and Weath.) Polunin, J. Bot. 74: 100. 1938. Saxifraga
cernua forma bulbillosa Engl. & Irmsch. in Engler, Das Pflanzenreich 67: 274.
1916. Saxifraga cernua forma ramosa Geml., Flora Sibir. 6: 162. 1769. (11)
Plants 10-25(-35) cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted, or
single-stemmed. (17) Plants vegetatively proliferating by bulbils <in leaf
axils and inflorescences>. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems densely hairy. (58)
Petioles 10-50 mm long. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal. (84)
Leaves alternate. (86) Leaves heterophyllous <upper flowering stem leaves
reduced, often bract-like, linear, not lobed, 1.5-7 mm long 0.3-3.0 mm wide,
sessile>. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves lobed <5-7, rarely 3-9, rounded to
acute lobes>. (89) Leaves (3-)5-15(-20) cm long. (90) Leaves 5-25(-35) mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades circular <sometimes>, or reniform. (97) Leaf blades
herbaceous, or succulent. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade
venation palmate, or inconspicuous. (125) Leaf bases cordate, or obtuse
<broadly>. (132) Leaf margins with hairs <sometimes sparse>, or without hairs.
(133) Leaf apices rounded. (135) Flowering stems with leaves <gradually
reduced in size towards the inflorescence>. (136) Flowering stems hairy <with
glandular hairs>. (145) Flowering stem 4-25 cm long. (149) Flowers solitary
<sometimes absent>, or in inflorescences. (151) Inflorescence racemose. (159)
Inflorescence with bulbils <in reduced leaf axils below the flowers>. (160)
Inflorescence 0-2.5 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence (0-)2-5. (193)
Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 5. (256)
Sepals free. (258) Sepals green. (259) Sepals hairy <with glandular hairs>.
(266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white. (270) Petals obovate,
or spatulate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 5-12 mm long. (276) Corolla
cup-like. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free. (293) Carpels partly fused.
(295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2.
(313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation axile. (325) Fruit a capsule
<not yet found in CAN specimens from the arctic islands or further south.>.
(330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown. (333) Fruit hairy.
(334) Fruit calyx persisting. (360) 2n = 36-73 <Löve and Löve 1975>. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (367) Common. (373) Substrate type:
nitrophilous <often near Thule sites and human habitation>. (374) Moist areas
<near creeks and lakeshores>, or snow beds, or rocky sites <on moist ledges
and in exposed dry sites>. (380) Polunin (1940) noted that this species
frequently flowers far into the summer, but has not been observed to set seed.
It reproduces by means of numerous reddish bulbils produced in the axils of
the flowering stem leaves and bracts. (381) This is a morphologically very
plastic taxon in which the habit of the plant and size of the leaves may
indicate favourable or unfavourable environmental conditions. The northernmost
record is Low Point, 83°06'N, on the north coast of Greenland. It has been
collected in Canada from Ward Hunt Island, 83°05'N (CAN). (384) Described by
Porsild (1957) as “nodding in youth”. Field observations are that the nodding
may occur before and after anthesis. Polunin (1940), recognized taxa that we
have not maintained. These were: 1. subsp. cernua, the usual one occurring
throughout our area. 2. var. exiliodes Polunin. Plants occurring on the
mainland regions of the Northwest Territories. 3. forma latibracteata (Fern. &
Weath.) Polunin. This taxon had been initially recognized as a variety but
Polunin noted that it once appeared to “have the geographical delimitation of
a true variety, but is now seen to be a mere frondose phase developed almost
everywhere (at least in our area) that the species grows in humid places among
rocks”. It had been distiguished on the characters: leaf blades larger,
10-55(-70) mm long, 8-20(-25) mm wide; 5-8 lobed. 4. forma bulbillosa Engler &
Irmsch. “bulbillis nigris permultis dense instructis”. Polunin (1940)
described this as a forma crassa, which in our area has been collected on the
west coast of Hudson Bay - in the case of Macoun’s Fullerton material “on wet
refuse from dog stalls” and on the closely adjacent Southampton Island. It
forms a marked contrast to the slender and graceful var. exilioides of the
same region. 5. forma ramosa. A rare form that Polunin (1940) considered to
have been collected in the Arctic Archipelago. Porsild (1957) and Hultén
(1968) did not recognize any of the intraspecific taxa recognized by Polunin
(1940). This species is plentiful everywhere, and one of the chief plants in
the High Arctic. It has a very wide range of tolerance to most environmental
conditions, occurring in almost all habitats from wet to very dry and
sheltered to exposed, and doing especially well in manured areas and snow
patches. It is highly resistant to frost. This taxon appears to be a
phenotypically plastic one in which various expressions have been named.
Saxifraga cernua was one of seven arctic species studied at Truelove Inlet,
Devon Island (Atkin et. al 1993) for their ability to utilize nitrate nitrogen
under field conditions. Saxifraga cernua, S. oppositifolia, Ceratium alpinum,
Oxyria dygyna, and Papaver radicatum were able to use nitrate nitrogen, while
Dryas integrifolia and Salix arctica showed little utilization. Porsild (1957,
1964) and Porsild and Cody (1980) recognized a single taxon for this species
and did not accept any of the four intraspecific taxa recognized by Polunin
(1940). No reason to do so has been found. (385) Porsild (1957, 1964) and
Porsild and Cody (1980) recognized a single taxon for this species and did not
accept any of the four intraspecific taxa recognized by Polunin (1940). No
reason to do so has been found. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's
Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's
Order Saxifragales. (431) Code used for graphics files: sxsxcn.


Saxifraga cespitosa <L.>

      (1) Tufted saxifrage, tufted alpine saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae,
saxifrage family. (4) Sp. Pl. 1: 404. 1753. (8) Saxifraga cespitosa subsp.
cespitosa L. Muscaria cespitosa (L.) Haw. Saxifraga cespitosa subsp.
eucespitosa Engl. & Irmsch. S. groenlandica L. Saxifraga cespitosa subsp.
uniflora (R.Br.) Porsild Saxifraga cespitosa subsp. exarotoides (Simm.) Engl.
& Irmsch. emend. Porsild. (11) Plants 3.5-20 cm high. (14) Plants perennial
herbs. (15) Plants tufted <sometimes loosely so, with elongated stems when the
plant grows in shady habitats>, or cushion-like. (17) Plants not vegetatively
proliferating by bulbils <but vigourous new shoots that might be mistaken for
propagules, occur in the axils of the upper-leaves>. (18) Taproot present
<persisting for a long time; adventitious roots weak>. (32) Stems erect
<usually>. (36) Stems sparsely hairy <small glandular hairs seen at 10-40x>.
(58) Petioles 7-12 mm long <-35 mm long in etiolated plants>. (82) Leaves
evergreen <on the lower stem only and persisting several years>. (83) Leaves
mostly basal, or in a basal rosette. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves
simple. (88) Leaves lobed <3, occasionally 5, linear to oblong, or obtuse
lobes, without prickles at the tips>. (89) Leaves 0.5-1.5(-2) cm long. (90)
Leaves 3-11 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades spatulate. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous,
or succulent. (105) Leaf blades hairy. (106) Leaf blades with hairs equally
dense on both surfaces. (118) Leaf blades hairs glandular. (119) Leaf blade
venation inconspicuous. (125) Leaf bases attenuate, or cuneate. (132) Leaf
margins with hairs <sparse glandular hairs, usually near base>. (134)
Conspicuous hydathodes present <at the apex of each leaf lobe>. (135)
Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy <with glandular
hairs>. (145) Flowering stem 2-15 cm long. (149) Flowers solitary, or in
inflorescences. (151) Inflorescence racemose, or cymose. (160) Inflorescence
0-2 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 1-4. (193) Flowers medium-sized,
5-15 mm in diameter or length <sometimes with a faint scent>. (255) Sepals 5.
(256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals green. (259) Sepals hairy <with glandular
hairs>. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white, or yellow <pale
cream, greenish yellow>, or red. (269) Petals with contrasting markings, or
without contrasting markings <three yellowish-green vertical stripes>. (270)
Petals obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 4-7(-15) mm long. (276)
Corolla cup-like. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free. (293) Carpels partly
fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary partly inferior. (308) Styles free. (309)
Styles 2. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules
20-50 <approx.>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit elongate-cylindrical
<obdeltoid, apex truncate>. (327) Fruit 7-10 mm long. (328) Fruit 5-7 mm wide.
(330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown. (333) Fruit hairy.
(334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds 20-50
<approx.>. (357) Seeds 0.8-1.2 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth
and winged <on one side>. (360) 2n = 80. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic and
alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Axel Heiberg, Parry Islands, Cornwallis,
Banks, Victoria, Prince of Wales, Somerset, and King William. (373) Substrate
type: calcareous, or nitrophilous. (374) Rocky sites. (380) Warming (1909)
noted that in the flowers, nectar is secreted abundantly from the yellowish
green glistening base of the gynoecium. He had observed the species in
Greenland to be slightly protandrous. In a recently opened flower, all the
stamens are erect or bent somewhat outwards to lie against the petals; but
gradually the stamens begin to bend inwards so that the open anthers are
placed above the still unripe stigmas. Later the stamens bend backwards, but
before they do so the styles have spread outwards and the stigmas have become
ripe. Self pollination may occur. Warming (1909) found that the terminal
flower in the inflorescence often, develops differently from the other
flowers. Its styles develop quickly and bend outwards, and the stigmas become
highly papillose while the anthers are still entirely closed. These anthers
are smaller, never open, and appear to have abnormal pollen, so that the
flower is regarded as pistillate with large staminodes. Polunin (1940)
reported that this species flowers and sets ripe seed in abundance, even in
the most northerly and exposed habitats. It is dispersed by wind shaking the
seeds out of the capsules. (381) This is a colonizing species that has a wide
range of environmental tolerance, but is unable to withstand competition, so
that it is rarely found in closed communities. The morphological expression of
plants is a useful indication of favourable or adverse growing conditions in a
habitat. Polunin (1940) indicated that the northernmost record was Cape Black,
83°01'N, on the north coast of Greenland. It has since been collected in
Canada on Ward Hunt Island, at 83°03'N (CAN). (384) A polymorphous species
that varies greatly in form and size with local conditions - from a loose
stand with branched inflorescences growing 20 cm or more high in sheltered
rocky or manured places to dense cushions bearing a few unifloral axes,
sometimes only 2 or 3 cm high in unfavourable situations. Distinct taxa have
been recognized based on this variation. We have not maintained the three that
Porsild (1957) and Porsild and Cody (1980) recognized as occuring in northern
Canada, as follows. 1. subsp. cespitosa (= subsp. eucespitosa Engl. & Irmsch.
an invalid name). Flowers relatively large, 8-10 mm wide, usually 3, rarely 1
or 2, Amphi-Atlantic subarctic. 2. subsp. uniflora. Flowers smaller, 4-7 mm
wide, mostly solitary, calyx purplish black, circumpolar with large gaps. 3.
subsp. exaratoides. Flowers mostly 3, calyx greenish-purple, endemic to
Paleozoic parts of Hudson Bay region, north to Ellesmere Island (Porsild
1955). Polunin (1940) observed that this is “one of the commonest and hardiest
of arctic plants, having such a wide range of tolerance to most environmental
conditions that it can grow in almost any habitat. However, it prefers clayey
plains and sandy or gravelly seashores, or exposed ridges. It is unable to
withstand much competiton and hence is found only occasionally in closed
communities“. Whittaker (1993), studying population patterns in a glacier
foreland succession at the Storebreen glacier in south-central Norway, found
that immediately after deglaciation the conditions were ideal for the growth
of S. cespitosa. Crawford et al. (1994) found a uniquely high level of anoxic
tolerance in Spitsbergen populations of this species and S. cernua, S.
foliolosa, S. hieracifolia and S. oppositifolia. Plants have the ability to
maintain turgid green leaves throughout a period of anoxia and into the
recovery phase. This is unusual as leaves normally loose turgor and wither
rapidly when deprived of oxygen. Tests on more southern populations from
Norway, Iceland, and Scotland failed to find equivalent ability to survive
oxygen deprivation. This suggests a different evolutionary history and the
idea that some arctic populations may have survived the Pleistocene epoch at
high latitudes in ice-free polar deserts. (385) Whittaker (1993) studying
plant population patterns in the Storbreen glacier foreland succession,
61°35'N, 8°E, found that S. cespitosa and Arabis alpina L. are visually the
most characteristic forbes of the youngest ground. Both species peaked in
local frequency within 30 years of deglaciation in sites close to the glacier
snout and subject to severe physical disturbance by periglacial activity. They
had virtually disappeared from the vegetation within approximately 50 years.
This is a polymorphous species that varies greatly in form and size with local
conditions. Distinct taxa have been recognized based on this variation. We
have not maintained the five taxa recognized by Polunin (1940) or the those
recognized by Porsild (1957) and Porsild and Cody (1980). (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order
Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (431) Code used for graphics
files: sxsxcs.


Saxifraga eschscholtzii <Sternb.>

      (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (8) Saxifraga fimbriata D. Don
Leptosea fimbriata (D. Don)Small. (9) Plants monoecious, or bisexual. (11)
Plants 1-5 cm high. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants cushion-like.
(32) Stems erect, or decumbent <numerous, densely compacted>. (36) Stems
glabrous. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves marcescent <turning pale brown or
grey>. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate
<overlapping densely>. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 2-4 cm long. (90)
Leaves 1-2.5 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades obovate, or spatulate. (105) Leaf
blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation inconspicuous. (132) Leaf margins
with hairs <large and hyaline>. (133) Leaf apices obtuse, or rounded. (134)
Conspicuous hydathodes absent <in contrast to S. oppositifolia. Caution: dead
leaves may turn white and superficially resemble lime deposits>. (135)
Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems glabrous. (145)
Flowering stem 0.2-1.5 cm long. (149) Flowers solitary. (193) Flowers small,
less than 5 mm in diameter or length <female flowers with large purplish
carpels and stamens with small anthers; male flowers with abortive carpels and
large yellow anthers>. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals purple.
(259) Sepals glabrous <ciliate margins>. (261) Sepals scarious. (266) Petals
5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow <drying pale brown>. (270) Petals
spatulate. (272) Petals 1.5-2.5 mm long. (274) Petals same length as the
calyx. (276) Corolla cup-like. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free. (293)
Carpels partly fused <for more than half their length>. (295) Carpels 2. (296)
Ovary superior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas per style 1.
(316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 10-50. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326)
Fruit ovoid <with divergent styles>. (327) Fruit 2.8-3.2 mm long. (328) Fruit
0.6-0.9 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple.
(334) Fruit calyx persisting <becoming reflexed>. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (356) Seeds 10-25. (357) Seeds 0.6-1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown.
(359) Seeds smooth <with fine markings seen at 40x>. (360) 2n = 12. (364)
Amphi-Beringian. (365) Alpine <species ranging eastwards along the Brooks
Range. In Canada, known from the North Yukon, from sea level to slopes of the
Buckland Hills and British Mountains, and a single record from Prince Patrick
Island (Porsild and Cody 1980>. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands: Parry Islands <Prince Patrick
Island>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Rocky sites <particularly
gravels, in crevices, and on rocky ledges>. (381) The northernmost record, and
first collection for the Arctic Archipelago, is N.W.T. Prince Patrick Island,
Greene Bay, 76°54'N, 119°30'W, 7 July, 1968, M. Kuc s.n. (CAN). (384) This
species is superficially similar to S. oppositifolia, but differs in its grey
green foliage and alternate leaves. It was first collected on the Arctic
Archipelago in 1968. It is possibly under-collected as it resembles lichens
when not flowering. (385) Plants are similar to S. oppositifolia, but grey
green with alternate leaves. It is possibly under-collected as it resembles
lichens when not flowering. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's
Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's
Order Saxifragales. (431) Code used for graphics files: sasaes.


Saxifraga flagellaris <Willd. ex Sternb.> subsp. platysepala <(Trautv.)
Porsild>

      (1) Spider plant, flagellate saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage
family. (4) Bot. Tidsskr. 51: 295. 1954. (8) Saxifraga. flagellaris var.
platysepala Trautv.Reise Sibir. 1:42. 1856. (11) Plants 1.5-15 cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs <living for 2-3 years, but dying after flowering>. (15)
Plants single-stemmed. (17) Plants vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (21)
Plants with conspicuously long horizontal stems. (22) Plants stoloniferous
<stolons long, filiform, naked, often bright red and terminating in a tiny
rosette that attaches to the substrate by adventitious roots>. (32) Stems
erect. (36) Stems sparsely hairy, or densely hairy <with glandular hairs>.
(57) Petioles present, or absent. (58) Petioles 0-6 mm long. (82) Leaves
evergreen. (83) Leaves mostly basal, or in a basal rosette. (84) Leaves
alternate. (86) Leaves heterophyllous <basal leaves usually wider with long
spine-like bristles; leaves below the inflorescence with glandular hairs>.
(87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 0.3-1 cm long. (90) Leaves 1-4 mm wide. (93)
Leaf blades elliptic, or oblanceolate, or obovate, or spatulate. (97) Leaf
blades herbaceous. (105) Leaf blades glabrous, or hairy <with marginal cilia
or small pointed teeth that may be interpreted as hairs>. (119) Leaf blade
venation inconspicuous. (125) Leaf bases acute, or attenuate, or cuneate.
(132) Leaf margins with hairs <often glandular>. (133) Leaf apices acute, or
obtuse. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes present <small, near the leaf apex on the
upper surface; they do not secrete lime>. (135) Flowering stems without
leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy <with glandular hairs>. (145) Flowering
stem 2-5 cm long. (149) Flowers solitary, or in inflorescences. (150)
Inflorescence terminal. (151) Inflorescence racemose, or cymose. (160)
Inflorescence 0-1 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 1-5. (193) Flowers
medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals
free. (258) Sepals green, or purple. (259) Sepals hairy <with glandular
hairs>. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow. (270) Petals
obovate. (272) Petals 6-10(-11.5) mm long. (274) Petals longer than the calyx.
(276) Corolla cup-like. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free. (293) Carpels
partly fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary partly inferior. (308) Styles free.
(309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation axile. (317)
Ovules 50-100 <approx.>. (325) Fruit a capsule <rarely collected in the
Canadian Arctic>. (326) Fruit spherical <with two horn-like styles>. (327)
Fruit (5-)8-12 mm long. (328) Fruit 3-6 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown, or purple. (334) Fruit calyx persisting <along
with other remains of the flower>. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds
50-100 <approx.>. (357) Seeds 0.9-1.1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds
smooth, or ridged <seen at 40x>. (360) 2n = 32. (364) Circumpolar. (365) High
arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands <adjacent to, and north
of,the Parry Channel>. (371) Arctic Islands: Devon, Ellesmere, Axel Heiberg,
Parry Islands, Cornwallis, Banks, Victoria, and Somerset. (373) Substrate
type: calcareous. (374) Rocky sites <barrens, usually in wet gravel>. (380)
Simmons (1906) claimed that the species is usually biennial; Gelting (1934)
that it is usually triennial in East Greenland. When the mother plant dies
after flowering the young rosettes are detached and may blow around on snow
during the winter becoming a means of propagation. Simmons (1906) stated that
the fruits hardly ever ripen on Ellesmere, and reproduction and dispersal are
mainly by vegetative means. Warming (1909) considered the species protandrous,
but also that self-pollination is almost inevitable. (381) This is a
colonizing species that is unable to withstand competition and is indicative
of damp open plains of clay or gravel. Polunin (1940) reported the
northernmost record as Cape Benet, 83°02'N, on the north coast of Greenland.
It has since been collected in Canada on Ward Hunt Island, 83°05'N (CAN).
(384) Galloe (1910) discussing the fleshy leaves of S. flagellaris suggesting
that there are three features that appear to be useless rudiments inherited
from parent plants with foliage leaves similar in structure to those of the
present day S. flagellaris. These are: (a) functionless (permanently closed)
stomata, (b) functionless hydathodes (in which the water pores are closed),
and (c) light-orientated (obliquely placed) pallisade cells. Polunin (1940)
noted that “this extremely attractive high-arctic and alpine species, was
known to the old sailors and whalers as ‘spider plant’ on account of its round
‘body’ and long, leg-like ‘flagellae’ subtending daughter individuals”. He
documented that with regard to substrate pH relationships there are curious
contradictions. Scholander (1934) says that it is “fairly common in North-East
Land, (Greenland) except in the pure dolomite areas, where it is almost
lacking”. Gelting (1934) wrote “as I have not found the species outside soil
rich in lime, I consider it calciphilous”. Polunin (1940) stated that he had
never found it on soils that were at all highly calcareous either in
Spitsbergen or in Arctic America, but always in rather exposed barren
situations where the soil was nevertheless lastingly damp due to poor drainage
or occasionally to feeding from a long-lasting snowdrift. Polunin’s
observations are true for plants found growing beside the road to “Satellite
hill” near Resolute Bay, Cornwallis Island. Porsild and Cody (1980)
recognized: 1. subsp. flagellaris, in which the hypanthium is broadly
campanulate (bell-shaped) and green. It is of Amphi-Beringian range, and known
only from calcareous rocks along the east slopes of the Mackenzie and
Richardson Mountains. 2. subsp. platysepala (Trautv.) Porsild, is a High
Arctic and nearly circumpolar taxon that is mostly 1-flowered, with a
turbinate (top-like) rather than campanulate hypanthium that is dark purple,
has sepals that are obovate-oblong, united in the lower third, and covered by
stalked, purple-headed glands. They indicated that this taxon has not been
reported from the continent. Polunin (1940) commented that although the
species as a whole is very variable he had not been able to find marked taxa
within the Canadian Arctic. Porsild (1957, 1964) and Porsild and Cody (1980)
recognized the collections from the Canadian Arctic Archipelago as S.
flagellaris subsp. platysepala. (385) Polunin (1940) commented that although
the species as a whole is very variable he had not been able to find marked
taxa within the Canadian Arctic. Porsild (1957, 1964) and Porsild and Cody
(1980) recognized the collections from the Canadian Arctic Archipelago as S.
flagellaris subsp. platysepala. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's
Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's
Order Saxifragales. (431) Code used for graphics files: sxsxfl.


Saxifraga foliolosa <R. Br.>

      (1) Foliolose saxifrage, grained saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage
family. (8) Hydatica foliolosa (R. Br.) Small Saxifraga stellaris var. comosa
Retzius Fl. Scand. Prodr., 79. 1779. Saxifraga stellaris subsp. comosa
(Retzius) Braun-Blanquet var. foliolosa R. Br. (11) Plants 3-15(-25) cm high.
(14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted, or single-stemmed. (17)
Plants vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (21) Plants without easily seen
horizontal stems <Porsild, (1957) indicated that stolons ending in leafy
rosettes occur, but this has not been substantiated>. (32) Stems erect. (36)
Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy <with fine white hairs>. (57) Petioles
absent. (82) Leaves marcescent <somewhat>. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette.
(84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves not lobed. (89) Leaves
1-2.5 cm long. (90) Leaves 3-8 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades oblanceolate, or
spatulate. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
inconspicuous. (132) Leaf margins with hairs <sparsely>, or without hairs.
(133) Leaf apices acute, or obtuse. (135) Flowering stems without leaves.
(136) Flowering stems hairy <with sparse or dense glandular hairs>. (145)
Flowering stem 2-20 cm long. (150) Inflorescence terminal <with or without one
or more flowers at the apex>. (151) Inflorescence racemose, or paniculate.
(159) Inflorescence with bulbils <or small leafy buds that occur on the stems
below the flowers>. (160) Inflorescence 0-5 cm long. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence 0-7. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length.
(255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals green, or purple. (259) Sepals
glabrous. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white, or pink.
(269) Petals with contrasting markings <usually with 2 yellow spots near the
base>. (270) Petals lanceolate <with a narrow stalk-like base>. (271) Petals
unlobed. (272) Petals 3.5-6 mm long. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (276)
Corolla cup-like. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free. (293) Carpels partly
fused <more than half of their length>. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior.
(308) Styles free. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation axile. (317)
Ovules 50-100 <approx.>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit spherical <with 2
divergent carpel apices>. (327) Fruit 3-5 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-3.5 mm wide.
(330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting <reflexed>. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds 50-100
<approx.>. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Axel
Heiberg, Parry Islands, Cornwallis, Banks, Victoria, Prince of Wales, and King
William. (374) Moist areas <often by the edge of small streams or beside ponds
in wet tundra>, or rocky sites <on wet slopes>. (380) In the Arctic
Archipelago, the flowers are replaced by an abundance of little bulbils,
although two or three of the main branches may still bear terminal flowers.
There is very often a single flower crowning the central axis, except on
plants growing in extreme habitats. (381) The habit of the plant is an
indication of the environment in which it is growing. The species is
phenotypically plastic varying from robust plants 30 cm high with numerous
stems in favourable environments, to delicate plants 8-10 cm high with few
stems in harsh habitats. The northernmost record is Low Point, 83°06'N, on the
north coast of Greenland. In Canada, it has been collected on Ward Hunt
Island, 83°03'N (CAN). (384) Polunin (1940) recognized this taxon as
wide-ranging latitudinally, and fairly common almost everywhere, growing
chiefly on damp humus soil or among mosses. He observed that this species
varies in its general robustness, from plants with many thick and much
branched stems up to 30 cm in height. More commonly plants are tiny rosettes
supporting a single very slender unbranched stem only 8-10 cm high. The taxon
was treated as S. stellaris var. comosa Retzius by Polunin (1940) and S.
foliolosa by Porsild (1957, 1964) and Porsild and Cody (1980). (385) The taxon
was treated as S. stellaris var. comosa Retzius by Polunin (1940) and S.
foliolosa by Porsild (1957, 1964) and Porsild and Cody (1980). (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order
Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (431) Code used for graphics
files: sxsxfo.


Saxifraga hieracifolia <Waldst. & Kit.>

      (1) Hawkweed-leaf saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (4)
Pl. Rar. Hung. 1: 17. 1802. (8) Saxifaga rydbergii Small (known from
Yellowstone). (11) Plants 7-30 cm high <-50 cm tall further south>. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants single-stemmed, or tufted <sometimes>.
(21) Plants with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous <rhizome
tending to be erect, fairly thick and robust, with long, vigorous,
adventitious roots>. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems densely hairy <with white
hairs that have small, dark glandular tips>. (58) Petioles 10-30(-40) mm long.
(82) Leaves evergreen. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette. (84) Leaves alternate.
(86) Leaves heterophyllous <basal leaves with petioles, flowers born in the
axils of reduced leaves>. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 1.5-5(-7) cm long.
(90) Leaves 9-30 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades elliptic, or linear <often reddish
below>. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or succulent. (105) Leaf blades hairy.
(106) Leaf blades with hairs on the abaxial <sparse and reddish>. (119) Leaf
blade venation appearing single-veined. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (132) Leaf
margins with hairs <white and wooly>. (133) Leaf apices acute, or obtuse.
(134) Conspicuous hydathodes present <at the apex of each tooth; they do not
secrete lime>. (135) Flowering stems without leaves <sometimes with leafy
bracts subtending the flowers>. (136) Flowering stems hairy <hairs dense,
gland tipped>. (145) Flowering stem 5-20 cm long. (151) Inflorescence spicate.
(160) Inflorescence 1-10 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 5-16. (193)
Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 5. (256)
Sepals free. (258) Sepals purple. (259) Sepals glabrous. (266) Petals 5. (267)
Petals free. (268) Petals green, or red <sometimes purplish, not very
conspicuous>. (270) Petals ovate <to triangular>. (271) Petals unlobed. (272)
Petals 1-2 mm long. (274) Petals shorter than the calyx, or same length as the
calyx. (276) Corolla cup-like. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free. (293)
Carpels partly fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary inferior. (308) Styles
free. (309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas per style 1 <not papillose, unlike most
other Saxifraga species>. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 50-100
<approx.>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit spherical <comprising 2 partly
fused flattened ovoid carpels with divergent styles>. (327) Fruit 4.5-6 mm
long. (328) Fruit 5-7 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332)
Fruit purple. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting.
(356) Seeds 50-100 <approx.>. (357) Seeds 1.1-1.5 mm long. (358) Seeds brown.
(359) Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = 112. (364) Circumpolar <except West
Greenland>. (365) Arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the Arctic Islands.
(367) Uncommon <and sporadic>. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Parry
Islands, and Victoria. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Moist areas <in
turfy habitats on tundra, in alpine meadows, and solifluction soil.>. (380)
Plants have numerous flowers and generally manage to set seed (Polunin 1940).
Warming (1909) observed that the flowers are small and rarely open in a
stellate manner, but remain more or less closed with small, erect, slightly
inwardly-bent petals. Nectar is secreted from a sinuously-angular nectary at
the base of each style. A photograph in the image library with this database
shows fully open flowers. (381) This species is indicative of rather damp
mossy conditions, either beside streams, or in depressions well covered with
snow in winter. Polunin (1940) reported the northernmost record as Heclahamna
in Sorgfjord, approximately 79°55'N, on the north coast of Spitsbergen. It has
since been collected in Canada on Ellesmere Island, Borup Fiord, 80°53'N
(CAN). (384) This species was described from the Carpathians (Hultén 1968).
Polunin (1940) noted that this remarkable species, which in far northern
Spitsbergen grows taller than almost any other plant, is of limited
distribution but somewhat variable in the Canadian Arctic. Most individuals
are very coarse, with a thick erect axis 25-30 cm high, but in some cases the
axis is much shorter and more slender, with the leaves being smaller and
rounder, so that the plant takes on the aspect of S. nivalis. Indeed
transitions (hybrids?) appear to occur between the two species. Saxifraga
hieracifolia also varies markedly in the distance between successive nodes of
the mature fruiting inflorescences; nevertheless all the material from within
our area belongs to the typical variety. Polunin (1940), Porsild (1957, 1964),
and Porsild and Cody (1980) used this name. (385) Polunin (1940), Porsild
(1957, 1964), and Porsild and Cody (1980) used this name. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order
Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (431) Code used for graphics
files: sxsxhf.


Saxifraga hirculus <L.> var. propinqua <(R.Br.) Simm.>

      (1) Yellow marsh saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (4)
Svensk Bot. Tidskr. 45: 379. 1951. (8) Saxifraga propinqua R.Br. Leptasea
alaskana Small in Hultén 1968. Saxifraga hirculus var. propinqua (R. Br.)
Simm. in Porsild 1957. (11) Plants 4-20(-25) cm high. (14) Plants perennial
herbs. (15) Plants tufted. (17) Plants vegetatively proliferating by bulbils
<at the end of rhizomes that develop as new plants>. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous <usually>, or stoloniferous. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems
sparsely hairy <with fine brown hairs>. (57) Petioles present <at least on the
basal leaves, stem leaves often sessile>. (58) Petioles 3-15(-35) mm long.
(82) Leaves evergreen <at least the youngest foliage leaves over wintering>.
(83) Leaves mostly basal, or distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves
alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 0.5-1.3 cm long. (90) Leaves 2-4 mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades oblanceolate, or spatulate. (105) Leaf blades glabrous.
(119) Leaf blade venation inconspicuous. (125) Leaf bases attenuate. (133)
Leaf apices obtuse, or acute <bluntly>. (135) Flowering stems with leaves.
(136) Flowering stems hairy <more pubescent towards the inflorescence, with
orange-brown hairs>. (145) Flowering stem 1-6 cm long. (149) Flowers solitary
<usually>, or in inflorescences. (151) Inflorescence spicate <if applicable>.
(160) Inflorescence 0.5-2 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 1(-3).
(193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 5.
(256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals green, or purple. (259) Sepals glabrous <with
orange brown ciliate margins>. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals
yellow. (269) Petals with contrasting markings <as “lemon” coloured dots on
each side of a basal swelling>. (270) Petals obovate, or elliptic. (271)
Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 6-11 mm long. (276) Corolla cup-like. (277)
Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free. (294) Carpels completely fused. (295) Carpels
2. (296) Ovary superior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2 <very short>. (313)
Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 50-100 <approx.>.
(325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit ovoid, or ellipsoid. (327) Fruit 6-9 mm
long. (328) Fruit 4-6.5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332)
Fruit brown, or purple. (334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (356) Seeds 50-100 <approx.>. (357) Seeds 0.5-0.7 mm long. (358)
Seeds black, or brown. (359) Seeds verrucose <minutely so, seen at 40X>. (360)
2n = 16 and 24. (364) Circumpolar. (365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the
Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere,
Axel Heiberg, Parry Islands, Cornwallis, Banks, Victoria, Prince of Wales, and
King William. (374) Wet meadows, or moist areas <mossy meadows, by brooks and
lake shores. Where it is abundant the showy flowers may give a yellow tinge to
the tundra. It occurs sparingly on drier areas of open clay>. (380) In
Greenland, the flowers are strongly protandrous (Warming 1909). Pistillate
flowers, and forms showing all the transitional stages between these and the
usual flowers, are found on Spitsbergen (Andersson and Hesselman, 1900).
Different sized flies and other Diptera have been observed to visit the
flowers. (381) The height of plants of this species can be used as an
indicator of how severe the growing conditions in a particular habitat may be.
Plants more than 15 cm tall occur in favourable environments. Polunin (1940)
recorded the northernmost record as Spitsbergen, 79°57'N. It has since been
found on Ellesmere Island, from Lower Wood Creek, 82°31'N (DAO). (384) Polunin
(1940) noted that this taxon exhibits considerable variation in our area.
Hedberg (1992) in a study of taxonomic differentiation in S. hirculus found
field fixations of specimens from Arctic Canada yielded two chromosome
numbers, 2n = 16 and 24 and collections of subsp. hirculus were 2n=31. This
lead to a detailed cytotaxonomic study of the species as a whole and the
conclusion that since most of the material of S. hirculus studied could be
easily distributed between four morphologically and geographically
distinguishable populations, they deserved taxonomic recognition although
intermediates were found where ever the populations meet. While Hedberg (1992)
recognized the groups as subspecies, he indicated that only subsp. propinqua
occurs in the Canadian Arctic. Warncke et al. (1993) listed 76 species of
insects visiting S. hirculus at the only site where it occurs in Switzerland.
Based on the number of flower visits they found four species were dominant,
and only two of the 76 species were among the visitors to flowers of S.
hirculus in Denmark. Polunin (1940) recognized both var. hirculus and var.
propinqua as occuring in the Canadian Arctic. Porsild (1957) indicated that
var. hirculus is a circumpolar arctic-alpine species and considered that only
var. propinqua occurs on the Canadian arctic archipelago. (385) Polunin (1940)
recognized both var. hirculus and var. propinqua as occuring in the Canadian
Arctic. Porsild (1964) indicated that var. hirculus is a circumpolar
arctic-alpine species and considered that only var. propinqua occurs on the
Canadian arctic archipelago. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's
Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's
Order Saxifragales. (431) Code used for graphics files: sxsxhc.


Saxifraga nivalis <L.> var. nivalis

      (1) Alpine saxifrage, clustered alpine saxifrage, snow saxifrage. (2)
Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (4) Sp. Pl. 1: 401. 1753. (8) Micranthes
nivalis (L.) Small Micranthes kumlienii Small S. gaspensis Fern. S. nivalis L.
var. gaspensis (Fern.) Boivin S. rhomboidea Greene Saxifraga nivalis var.
labradorica Fern. Rhodora 19: 142. 1917. Saxifraga nivalis forma labradorica
(Fern.) Polunin Polunin. J. Bot. 77: 271. 1939. (11) Plants 2-20(-30) cm high.
(14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants in basal rosettes. (19) Roots black.
(21) Plants with short horizontal stems. (22) Plants rhizomatous <underground
stems erect, usually short, often branched>. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems
densely hairy <with white hairs that have dark glandular tips>. (58) Petioles
(0.2-)0.5-2.5 mm long <broad>. (82) Leaves evergreen. (83) Leaves in a basal
rosette. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 6-25(-40) cm
long. (90) Leaves 4-20 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades ovate <broadly>, or circular.
(97) Leaf blades leathery <slightly; surfaces are often dark-green above,
reddish-purple beneath>. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
appearing single-veined, or inconspicuous. (125) Leaf bases obtuse, or
attenuate <broadly>. (133) Leaf apices obtuse, or rounded, or acute <rarely>.
(135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy <densely
glandular-pubescent with some longer white hairs>. (145) Flowering stem
1-18(-28) cm long. (151) Inflorescence paniculate, or head-like <flowers in
1-2 dense clusters with bracts subtending the flowers>. (160) Inflorescence
0.5-5 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 3-10. (193) Flowers small, less
than 5 mm in diameter or length, or medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or
length. (194) Flowers sessile or subsessile. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals
free. (258) Sepals green, or purple. (259) Sepals glabrous. (266) Petals 5.
(267) Petals free. (268) Petals white <rarely greenish yellow, or reddish to
light pink>. (269) Petals without contrasting markings <although tips of the
petals are sometimes reddish>. (270) Petals ovate, or elliptic. (271) Petals
unlobed. (272) Petals 1.5-2.5 mm long. (274) Petals longer than the calyx, or
same length as the calyx. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free. (293) Carpels
partly fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary partly inferior. (308) Styles free.
(309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316) Placentation axile. (317)
Ovules 50-100 <approx.>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit spherical <plump
lower half, with straight or slightly divergent free carpels above>. (327)
Fruit 3-4 mm long. (328) Fruit 4.5-5.5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple, or green at maturity. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting <straight or slightly divergent>.
(356) Seeds 50-100 <approx.>. (357) Seeds 0.5-1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown
<yellowish>. (359) Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = 60. (364) Circumpolar. (365)
Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common <More common in
the northern part of the area, and relatively common throughout, but never
noted as really abundant or important.>. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon,
Ellesmere, Axel Heiberg, Parry Islands, Cornwallis, Banks, Victoria, Prince of
Wales, and King William. (373) Substrate type: acidic, or nitrophilous
<growing most luxuriantly on manured soils around bird-cliffs, especially in
seepage crevices and Inuit middens. It can also grow in very barren areas>.
(374) Moist areas <in closed marshes and on open patches of damp soil. It also
occurs on solifluction slopes and in places where the surface may become dry
in late summer>, or snow beds, or rocky sites <usually on sloping ground. It
has been found to be three times more likely on the sunny side, than the damp
shady side of a slope (Galloe 1910>. (380) The flowers pass the winter well
developed and are among the first to open in the spring. Nectar is secreted by
the glistening greenish base of the styles. After rain, a large collection of
water, evidently containing nectar, can be seen at the bottom of the flower;
scent is absent (Warming 1909). Protandry is the rule for the flowers of this
species in Greenland but both sexes are mature during the greater part of the
flowering period, and self-pollination appears to be very common, and is at
any rate easily possible if cross-pollination does not occur. Fruit usually
ripens in West Greenland and on Ellesmere Island. (381) This species varies
according to the quality of the habitat from the smallest dwarf-forms to
robust “gigantic specimens” (Porsild 1957). The size of the plant is a
reflection of growing conditions in the environment. The northernmost record
is Low Point, 83°06'N, on the north coast of Greenland. It has been collected
in Canada on Ward Hunt Island, 83°05'N (CAN). (384) Anatomically, this species
was considered to be a mesophyte (Galloe 1910) because the leaves have
prominent stomata upon both surfaces, thin-walled epidermal cells, and a
spongy parenchyma. Polunin (1940) considered the typical form to be the most
frequent in our area. He indicated that it is rather coarse, growing generally
8-20 cm high, and occurring almost everywhere. He noted that Micranthes
kumlienii Small was described as a new species from within our area. Polunin
(1940) stated that he was unable to separate it from the present form, either
on the basis of the original diagnosis or on the type material that he had
seen, and which he considered clearly belongs to S. nivalis. The chief
distinction on which Micranthes kumlienii was recognized was in having
unusually fine dentation of the leaves, but this is a variable character.
Porsild (1957) recognized S. nivalis L. and also S. tenuis (Wahlenb.) H. Sm.
ex Lindm., treated here as variety tenuis. Porsild (1957), Böcher (1968)
recognized S. reflexa Hook. that occurs in Alaska, the Yukon and N.W.
Mackenzie as closely related to S. nivalis, but distinguished by its more open
inflorescence, reflexed sepals and clavate filaments. Porsild (1957, 1964) and
Porsild and Cody (1980) recognized this taxon and S. tenuis (Wahlenb.) H. Sm.
ex Linn. (385) Polunin (1940) recognized variety nivalis and variety tenuis.
Porsild (1957, 1964) and Porsild and Cody (1980) treated the taxa as full
species. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae.
(394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae.
(410) Cronquist's Order Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: sxsxni.


Saxifraga nivalis <L.> var. tenuis <Wahlenb.>

      (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (4) Fl. Lapp. 114. 1812. (8) S.
tenuis (Wahlenb.) H. Sm. S. stricta Hormen. (11) Plants 2-8(-10) cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants in basal rosettes. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems. (22)
Plants rhizomatous <erect, usually short, but sometimes 5-6 cm long>. (32)
Stems erect. (36) Stems sparsely hairy <without white hairs that have dark
glandular tips>. (58) Petioles 0.5-2.5(-3) mm long. (82) Leaves evergreen.
(83) Leaves in a basal rosette. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple.
(89) Leaves 0.6-2.5(-4) cm long. (90) Leaves 4-20 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades
ovate <broadly>, or circular. (97) Leaf blades leathery <slightly; surfaces
are often dark-green above, reddish-purple beneath>. (105) Leaf blades hairy.
(106) Leaf blades with hairs on the abaxial. (119) Leaf blade venation
appearing single-veined, or inconspicuous. (125) Leaf bases obtuse, or
attenuate <broadly>. (133) Leaf apices obtuse, or rounded, or acute <rarely>.
(135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy <but less so
than in var. nivalis>. (145) Flowering stem 1-15 cm long. (151) Inflorescence
paniculate, or head-like. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-5 cm long. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence 1-3. (193) Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length,
or medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (194) Flowers borne on a
stalk. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals green, or purple. (259)
Sepals glabrous. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white
<greenish yellow, or reddish to light pink>. (269) Petals without contrasting
markings <tips of the petals reddish>. (270) Petals ovate, or elliptic. (271)
Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 1.5-2.5 mm long. (274) Petals longer than the
calyx, or same length as the calyx. (276) Corolla cup-like <slightly>. (277)
Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free. (293) Carpels partly fused. (295) Carpels 2.
(296) Ovary partly inferior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas
per style 1. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 50-100 <approx.>. (325)
Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit spherical <lower half, with reflexed free carpels
above>. (327) Fruit 3-4 mm long. (328) Fruit 4.5-5.5 mm wide <plump>. (330)
Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit purple, or green at maturity.
(334) Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting <always recurved>.
(356) Seeds 50-100 <approx.>. (357) Seeds 0.5-1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown
<yellowish>. (359) Seeds verrucose. (360) 2n = 20. (364) Circumpolar. (365)
Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic
Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Axel Heiberg, Parry Islands, Cornwallis,
Banks, Victoria, Prince of Wales, and King William. (373) Substrate type:
acidic and nitrophilous. (374) Moist areas, or rocky sites <on rocky ledges>.
(381) The northernmost record is Canada, Ward Hunt Island, 83°03'N (CAN).
(384) Polunin (1940) noted that when fully developed this variety is so
strikingly different from var. nivalis that some have advocated its
maintenance as a separate species. He considered that in the absence of
cytological investigation or breeding tests, separate species status seemed
scarcely advisable in view of the facts that all transitions occur and that
var. tenuis persists alone only in the most unfavourable habitats. It is
treated here as a variety of S. nivalis pending further study, and is
distinguished by the coarse rust hairs on the underside of the leaves. While
Porsild (1957) claimed that plants of this variety have a lower stature and
more delicate habit, this observation was not supported by a preliminary
survey of approximately 200 specimens of the complex at the Canadian National
Herbarium. (385) Polunin (1940) noted that when fully developed this variety
is so strikingly different from var. nivalis that some have advocated its
maintenance as a separate species. He considered that separate species status
seemed scarcely advisable as all transitions occur and that variety tenuis
persists alone only in the most unfavourable habitats, observations that
preliminary studies support. Porsild (1957, 1964) and Porsild and Cody (1980)
treated variety nivalis and variety tenuis as species. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order
Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (431) Code used for graphics
files: sxnitn.


Saxifraga oppositifolia <L.>

      (1) Purple saxifrage, purple mountain saxifrage, opposite-leafed
saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (4) Sp. Pl. 1: 402. 1753. (8)
Antiphylla oppositifolia (L.) Fourr. Saxifraga oppositifolia subsp.
grandulisepala Hultén Saxifraga oppositifolia subsp. smalliana (Engl. &
Irmsch.) Hultén Saxifraga oppositifolia forma pulvinata Andersson and
Hesselman. (11) Plants 2-5 cm high <rarely to 10 cm high where plants are
etiolated>. (14) Plants perennial herbs <with a tendency to become a sub-shrub
as the branches become woody>. (15) Plants cushion-like, or matted <forming
mats 20-50 cm in diameter>. (18) Taproot present. (32) Stems erect <branched
and highly compacted, with internodes so short that the shoots appear square>,
or prostrate <with trailing stems>. (36) Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy
<when visible>. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves evergreen, or marcescent
<the shoots over winter with new green leaves, which do not turn orange and
die until the end of the next growing season>. (83) Leaves distributed along
the stems <often imbricate, and densely overlapping>, or mostly basal
<appearing so when longer flowering stems are present>. (84) Leaves opposite
<4-ranked>. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 0.25-0.4 cm long. (90) Leaves 2-3
mm wide. (93) Leaf blades obovate. (97) Leaf blades leathery and succulent.
(105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation inconspicuous. (132)
Leaf margins with hairs <that are bristle-like>. (133) Leaf apices obtuse.
(134) Conspicuous hydathodes present <seen as pores on the thickened, often
flat, apex of the leaf; often with white calcium carbonate deposits;
illustrated in the image library>. (135) Flowering stems with leaves <that are
often more widely spaced, narrower, attenuate at base, and without conspicuous
truncate apices or hydathodes, than the leaves of the vegetative stems>. (136)
Flowering stems hairy. (145) Flowering stem 0.5-3(-5.5) cm long. (149) Flowers
solitary. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (255)
Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals green, or purple. (259) Sepals
hairy. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals purple, or pink, or red
<pale>, or white <rarely>. (270) Petals obovate <with narrow bases>. (271)
Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 6-9 mm long. (276) Corolla cup-like. (277)
Stamens 10. (293) Carpels partly fused. (295) Carpels 2 <rarely 4-5>. (296)
Ovary partly inferior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas per
style 1. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 50-100 <approx.>. (325) Fruit
a capsule. (326) Fruit spherical <lower half, with divergent free carpels
above>. (327) Fruit 5-7.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 4-5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry.
(331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown, or red <purplish>. (334) Fruit calyx
persisting <corolla persistent>. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds
50-100 <approx.>. (357) Seeds 0.7-1.1 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds
smooth, or verrucose <at one end>. (360) 2n = 26 and 52. (364) Circumpolar.
(365) Arctic. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common. (371)
Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Axel Heiberg, Parry Islands,
Cornwallis, Banks, Victoria, Prince of Wales, Somerset, and King William.
(373) Substrate type: acidic, or calcareous. (374) Rocky sites <on dry or
moist gravels, commonly in frost cracks on patterned ground. The species
characterizes extensive Saxifraga oppositifolia barrens; illustrated in the
image library. Plants occasionally grow in moss and in standing water (two
observations made at different locations on Ellesmere Island in 1994>. (380)
Saxifraga oppositifolia is almost always the earliest “flower” to appear in
spring, although sometimes some of the willows will be earlier by a day
(Polunin 1940). The flowers over winter in a well developed condition. One
observation was that in December, in Greenland, petals and stamens were
already coloured (Warming 1909). In West Greenland, they have been observed to
flower as early as late March. Plants from Svalbard to Nova Zemblia are
reported to have flowers with a strong scent. Nectar is often secreted
abundantly from the base of the ovary. The flower is so widely expanded, that
in rain or melting snow it may be filled with water. The flower is initially
protogynous and the stigmas mature before the flowers are fully expanded. At
first the styles are longer than the stamens, but gradually the anthers become
as long as the styles, and gather so closely around them that self-pollination
takes place. Staminate flowers occur, in which the gynoecium is very small,
but the stamens are of normal length. Such flowers do not set fruit.
Pistillate flowers have been observed. In these, the stamens were almost
rudimentary or sterile (Warming 1909). Wagner and Tengg (1993) studied the
embyrogenesis and seed development of S. oppositifolia plants growing in
European mountains. They found that immediately before the flowers open the
ovules are in the post-meiotic state and not ready for fertilization, until
the flowers are fully open. After fertilization there is a delay of 2-3 weeks
before the development of helobial endosperm begins. The differentiation and
ripening of the seeds takes a total of 11 weeks. (381) This species is usually
indicative of harsh environments where there is little competition from other
species. Saxifraga oppositifolia is one of the four species of plants known
from the northernmost botanical locality on earth, that is Lockwood Island,
83°24'N, on the north coast of Greenland. It has been collected in Canada on
Ward Hunt Island, 83°05'N. (CAN). (382) The flowers, which have a pleasant
fresh taste, are often eaten in large quantities when they appear early in the
growing season. Too many of the flowers eaten at once can induce diarrhoea.
(384) The variation in S. oppositifolia was the basis of a study by Teeri
(1972) who concluded that distinct forms that had been named as taxa, were
merely expressions of a single species that shows remarkable vegetatively
phenotypic plasticity with little reliable genotypic basis on which to
separate infraspecific taxa. Brysting et al. (1996) studied the purple
saxifrage on Svalbard to determine whether there were two taxa or one. They
concluded, that the conspicuous variation probably results from local, in situ
ecoclinal differentiation, and is without taxonomic significance, but
important in the context of arctic conservation biology and the potential
impact of global warming on Arctic vegetation. This is one of the common
species in the Arctic Archipelago. Polunin (1940) considered it possibly one
of the most numerous of all arctic species, as it dominates large tracts of
country in the Far North, if the term “dominates” can be used when the total
vegetation is extremely sparse and largely limited to occasional tufts of this
one species (illustrated in the image library). He considered it possibly the
hardiest of all phanerogams, at least to cold-rigour, occurring on the most
exposed ridges and hill tops, often where no other vascular plants can grow.
This may be because of the unique structure of the leaves. The internal
structure of the leaves led Galloe (1910) to consider this species a
xerophyte. The upper epidermal cells have fairly straight lateral walls with
numerous pits. The outer walls vary in thickness in different parts of the
leaf. Towards the apex they are very thick, and from there become gradually
thinner towards the leaf base. The cuticle is distinct and very finely
wrinkled. The stomata are mainly parallel to the length of the leaf. They are
entirely absent from the tip of the apex where the hydathode is. Immediately
behind the apex they occur in a broad band across the leaf and are partially
continued along the under-side of the leaf margin. The leaves are usually so
close together that for the greater part they overlap. Only the part of the
leaf that is covered with neighbouring leaves bears stomata, while the
light-exposed surface is almost without them. This was regarded as protection
against excessive transpiration by Lazniewski (1896). Galloe (1910) considered
that the distribution of the stomata represent a primitive form of
bud-protection in developing leaves, in a species where bud scales are absent.
The pallisade cells of the leaves at the exposed apex are very distinct and
occur on both the upper and lower surfaces. Polunin (1940) remarked that “S.
oppositifolia ... before and after flowering is among the most squalid-looking
of plants, forming untidy brownish mats or tussocks in barren and often dusty
situations. When it blooms it must be reckoned among the world’s greatest
beauties, especially as it stands out in its usually bleak and desolate
surroundings. Unfortunately, few ever see it at its best, which is surely in
the Far North, for it is so quickly over that the vast majority of the
ever-increasing band of summer visitors to arctic parts come too late”. (385)
Variation in the morphological expression of plants of S. oppositifolia was
the basis of studies by Teeri (1972) and Brysting et al. (1996). Both
concluded that the variations are merely expressions of a single vegetatively
phenotypically plastic species. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's
Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's
Order Saxifragales. (431) Code used for graphics files: sxsxop.


Saxifraga paniculata <P. Mill.>

      (1) White mountain saxifrage, livelong saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae,
saxifrage family. (4) Fl. Austr. 5: 18. 1788. Saxifraga aizoon Jacq. var.
neogaea Butters. (8) Chondrosea aizoon (Jacq.) Haw. Chondrosea paniculata (P.
Mill,) A. Löve Chondrosea paniuclata subsp. neogaea (Butters) A. Löve
Saxifraga aizoon subsp. neogaea Butters. (11) Plants 7-20 cm high <to 25 cm
high in Greenland specimens>. (14) Plants perennial herbs. (15) Plants tufted,
or single-stemmed. (17) Plants vegetatively proliferating by bulbils <lateral
shoots, often closely associated with the parent shoot>. (32) Stems erect.
(36) Stems sparsely hairy <with glandular hairs>. (52) Stipules absent. (57)
Petioles absent. (82) Leaves evergreen, or marcescent <remaining either green
or reddish during the winter>. (83) Leaves in a basal rosette. (84) Leaves
alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 0.7-2 cm long. (90) Leaves 3-5.5 mm
wide. (93) Leaf blades oblanceolate, or obovate, or spatulate. (97) Leaf
blades leathery. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation
inconspicuous. (133) Leaf apices obtuse, or rounded <sometimes>. (134)
Conspicuous hydathodes present <on upper surface at each serration>. (135)
Flowering stems with leaves <leaves similar in shape but smaller than the
basal leaves>. (136) Flowering stems hairy <with glandular hairs>. (145)
Flowering stem 5-18 cm long. (151) Inflorescence paniculate. (160)
Inflorescence 1-3 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 5-20. (193) Flowers
medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals
free. (258) Sepals green, or purple, or red. (259) Sepals hairy. (266) Petals
5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals white, or yellow <creamy>. (269) Petals
with contrasting markings <usually orange or purple spots>. (270) Petals
obovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 6-9 mm long. (274) Petals longer
than the calyx. (276) Corolla cup-like. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free.
(293) Carpels partly fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary partly inferior.
(308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316)
Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 20-50 <approx.>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326)
Fruit spherical, or ovoid <globose>. (327) Fruit 3-6 mm long. (328) Fruit
3.5-4.5 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown.
(334) Fruit calyx persisting <sepals diverging>. (335) Fruit styles
persisting. (356) Seeds 20-50 <approx.>. (357) Seeds 0.7-0.9 mm long. (358)
Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth <at 10X, minutely roughened at 40X>. (360) 2n
= 28. (364) Amphi-Atlantic <with outliers on Great Slave Lake and Lake
Superior, Porsild, 1957>. (365) Arctic. (366) Of limited distribution in the
Arctic Islands <recorded from seven locations on Baffin Island, rare to
occasional and very local>. (373) Substrate type: calcareous. (374) Rocky
sites <on cliff ledges, in dry sunny situations>. (380) Polunin (1940) noted
that this species “flowers rather sparingly”. Warming (1909) indicated that,
in Greenland, this species flowers relatively late in July and exhibits marked
protandry. The terminal flower is the first to open, and rarely are more than
2 stamens functional at the same time. The styles are at first very small,
with the plane surfaces of the stigmas facing each other. As they develop they
spread out. The surface of the stigmas has short club-shaped hairs. Self
pollination may take place by the stigmas bending towards the anthers in which
there may still be some pollen left. Fruit has been observed to ripen in West
Greenland. (381) Plants are indicative of dry calcareous environments. The
northernmost record is from West Greenland, 74°30'N (Polunin 1940). The
northernmost record from Canada is Baffin Island, Pangnirtung, 66°08'N (CAN).
(384) The name S. paniculata Miller is used in place of the name S. aizoon
Jacq. which was used in many North American Floras (see, e.g., Polunin 1940,
Porsild 1957, Scoggan 1978, and Gleason and Cronquist 1991). Saxifraga
paniculata was published in 1768 (Gard. Dict. ed. 8, no. 3) and predates the
name S. aizoon Jacq. published in 1778 (Fl. Austr. 5: 18). Warming (1909)
noted that the leaves after dying persist for a long time in a black, decaying
condition. In Europe, this species belongs to a complex in which has
polymorphic entities have been recorded (Engler and Irmscher 1919). Polunin
(1940) suggested that in the Arctic Archipelago it appears to vary very
little. Galloe (1910) noted that each tooth of the leaves has a vein that
terminates in a hydathode with a large cavity. The epidermis of the hydathode
has 1-2 water pores and some of the cells are elongated as papillae. In many
of the cells of the mesophyll there are quantities of tanin. (385) It was
treated as S. aizoon Jacq. by Polunin (1940) and as S. aizoon var. neogaea
Butters by Porsild (1957, 1964) and Porsild and Cody (1980). The name
Saxifraga paniculata was published in 1768 (Gard. Dict. ed. 8, no. 3) and
predates the name S. aizoon Jacq. published in 1778 (Fl. Austr. 5: 18). (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394)
Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: sxsxpa.


Saxifraga rivularis <L.>

      (1) Alpine brook saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (4) Sp.
Pl. 1: 404. 1752. (8) Saxifraga debilis Engelm. ex Gray Saxifraga hyperborea
R. Br. subsp. debilis (Engelm. ex Gray) A. & D. Löve & Kapoor Saxifraga
rivularis var. debilis (Engelm. ex Gray) Dorn Saxifraga rivularis var.
flexuosa (Sternb.) Engl. & Irmsch. Saxifraga rivularis var. hyperborea (R.
Br.) Dorn Saxifraga rivularis forma hyperborea (R.Br.) Hook. Saxifraga
rivularis forma purpurascens Lange. (11) Plants 1-10(-12) cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs <dwarf delicate plants>. (15) Plants tufted. (17) Plants
vegetatively proliferating by bulbils <basal bulbils consisting of a few thick
scale leaves>, or not vegetatively proliferating by bulbils. (21) Plants with
conspicuously long horizontal stems, or with short horizontal stems, or
without easily seen horizontal stems <on some herbarium specimens>. (22)
Plants stoloniferous <as horizontally growing “runners”, to 6 cm long, with
glandular hairs on the surface, and with scale leaves. The runners bend
upwards, producing roots and foliage leaves>, or rhizomatous <as an
abbreviated, vertical rhizome, sometimes not readily visible>. (32) Stems
erect. (36) Stems sparsely hairy. (58) Petioles 7-50 mm long <or rarely
absent>. (82) Leaves deciduous. (83) Leaves mostly basal, or distributed along
the stems. (84) Leaves alternate. (87) Leaves simple. (88) Leaves lobed
<deeply so, with 3 to 5 broad lobes>. (89) Leaves (0.2-)0.4-0.8 cm long. (90)
Leaves (1.5-)4-14 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades reniform. (105) Leaf blades
glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation palmate, or inconspicuous. (134)
Conspicuous hydathodes present <at the apex of each leaf lobe>. (135)
Flowering stems with leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy <with tangled
glandular hairs>. (145) Flowering stem 0.5-3.5 cm long. (149) Flowers
solitary, or in inflorescences. (151) Inflorescence racemose <if applicable>.
(160) Inflorescence 0-1 cm long. (192) Flowers per inflorescence 2-5. (193)
Flowers small, less than 5 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 5. (256)
Sepals free. (258) Sepals green, or brown <reddish>. (259) Sepals hairy
<slightly near base>, or glabrous. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals white, or red, or pink <pale>. (270) Petals oblanceolate, or elliptic
<narrow>. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 2.5-5(-8) mm long. (274) Petals
longer than the calyx. (276) Corolla cup-like. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens
free. (279) Stamens filament all equal in length. (293) Carpels apocarpous
<for half the length above the perianth insertion>. (295) Carpels 2. (296)
Ovary partly inferior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas per
style 1. (316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules 50-100 <approx.>. (325) Fruit
a capsule. (326) Fruit ellipsoid <with divergent free carpel tips>. (327)
Fruit (4-)5.5-7(-8) mm long. (328) Fruit 3.5-4 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331)
Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit black, or brown. (334) Fruit calyx persisting.
(335) Fruit styles persisting <becoming recurved and splitting to release
seeds>. (356) Seeds 50-100 <approx.>. (357) Seeds 0.6-0.9 mm long. (358) Seeds
brown. (359) Seeds verrucose <minutely>. (360) 2n = 26 and 52. (364)
Circumpolar. (365) Arctic, or alpine. (366) Wide-ranging in the Arctic
Islands. (367) Common. (371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Parry
Islands, Cornwallis, Banks, and Victoria. (373) Substrate type: calcareous, or
nitrophilous <found below bird cliffs and near human habitations. Described as
“markedly calcifugous”, Polunin 1940>. (374) Moist areas <gravelly, and mossy
places, or wet slopes>. (380) This species flowers and fruits abundantly
almost everywhere, and may also propagate prolifically vegetatively (Polunin
1940). Flowers are slightly protandrous, or distinctly homogamous.
Self-pollination has been observed (Galloe 1910) to result in fruit setting.
Seeds do not germinate until a year after they are formed, unless they are
exposed to hard frost. (381) Variation in the height of this plant is
dependent on local environmental conditions; in exposed habitats or towards
the inside of very late melting snow patches, the plant may be stunted and
less than 5 cm high, whereas in sheltered places, especially if they are well
manured, the plants may be 10 cm tall or occasionally taller. This species is
indicative of areas sufficiently damp that mosses are present, such as late
snow patches. The northernmost record is Canada, Ward Hunt Island, 83°06'N
(CAN). (384) Polunin (1940) indicated that this is one of the most ubiquitous
and generally common of arctic plants. It varies considerably in height,
hairiness, and the colour of the petals. On these characters minor formas have
been recognized, but they were not maintained by Porsild (1964) or Porsild and
Cody (1980). Polunin (1940) noted that this plant may penetrate farther into
very late melting snow patches than any other angiosperm. It is frequent
almost everywhere, and in places rather abundant, although so small as to be
often overlooked. Porsild (1964) indicated that plants completely matching the
description of S. hyperborea commonly grow within clones of typical S.
rivularis and although the chromosome counts are different, (S. hyperborea 2n
= 26, S. rivularis 2n =52) he implied that S. hyperborea is merely an
unimportant, ecological variation, presumably an autoploid. (385) Polunin
(1940) indicated that this species varies considerably in height, hairiness,
and the colour of the petals. Based on these characters minor formas have been
recognized but they were not maintained by Polunin(1940), Porsild (1957, 1964)
or Porsild and Cody (1980). Porsild (1964) indicated that plants completely
matching the description of S. hyperborea commonly grow within clones of
typical S. rivularis and although the chromosome counts are different,(S.
hyperborea 2n = 26, S. rivularis 2n =52) he implied that S. hyperborea is
merely an unimportant, ecological variant, presumably an autopolyploid. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394)
Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410)
Cronquist's Order Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (431)
Code used for graphics files: sxsxri.


Saxifraga serpyllifolia <Pursh>

      (1) Thyme-leaf saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (8)
Hirculus serpyllifolius (Pursh) W.A. Weber Saxifraga serpyllifolia var.
purpurea Pursh. (9) Plants monoecious. (11) Plants 1-5 cm high. (14) Plants
perennial herbs. (15) Plants matted <loosely>. (18) Taproot present <from each
rosette in a mat>. (32) Stems erect. (36) Stems sparsely hairy <with glandular
hairs>. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate <a
contrast with S. oppositifolia>. (87) Leaves simple. (89) Leaves 2-8.5 cm
long. (90) Leaves 0.4-1.6 mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear, or oblanceolate,
or oblong. (97) Leaf blades herbaceous, or succulent <slightly>. (105) Leaf
blades glabrous. (119) Leaf blade venation inconspicuous. (125) Leaf bases
acute <some rosette leaves>, or obtuse <stem leaves>. (133) Leaf apices
obtuse. (135) Flowering stems without leaves. (136) Flowering stems hairy.
(145) Flowering stem 0.5-2 cm long. (149) Flowers solitary. (193) Flowers
medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length. (255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals
free. (258) Sepals purple, or red. (259) Sepals glabrous <usually, but
occasionally with 1-2 glandular hairs>. (261) Sepals herbaceous <or slightly
fleshy>. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268) Petals yellow. (271) Petals
unlobed. (272) Petals 4-8 mm long. (274) Petals longer than the calyx. (276)
Corolla cup-like. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free. (293) Carpels partly
fused. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary superior. (307) Styles absent, or present
<very short>. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas per style 1.
(316) Placentation axile. (317) Ovules <many>. (325) Fruit a capsule <no fully
developed fruits have been found in Arctic Island collections>. (326) Fruit
ovoid <flask-shaped; see illustration in Porsild and Cody (1980) p.398>. (327)
Fruit 5-8 mm long. (328) Fruit 2-3 mm wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit
dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown <sometimes turning black>. (333) Fruit glabrous.
(335) Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds <many>. (358) Seeds <No fully
developed seeds have been examined>. (359) Seeds smooth <when young>. (360) 2n
= 16. (364) Amphi-Beringian <Porsild and Cody, 1980>. (365) Arctic. (366) Of
limited distribution in the Arctic Islands. (367) Rare. (371) Arctic Islands:
Parry Islands <Melville Island>. (373) Substrate type: <mostly on gravelly
scree slopes>. (381) The northernmost record, and first collection from the
Arctic Archipelgo, is from N.W.T., Melville Island, Sabine Peninsula, Barrow
Dome, 76°38'N, 109°05'W, 21 July, 1971, M. Kuc 157 (CAN). There have been
three other collections from different places on Melville Island. (384) The
first collection from the Arctic Archipelgo, was made in 1971(see character
123). There have been three other collections with vouchers as CAN from
different places on Melville Island. This tiny plant is easily overlooked and
is probably under collected. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's
Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's
Order Saxifragales. (431) Code used for graphics files: sxsxse.


Saxifraga stellaris <L.>

      (1) Starry saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (4) Sp. Pl.
1: 400. 1753. (8) Hydatica stellaris (L.) S. F. Gray . (364) Amphi-Atlantic.
(384) There is a photograph at CAN of a collection housed at Kew that was
collected before 1842. It is from Kickerten Island and may be the single
record mapped by Porsild (1957) for this taxon in the Arctic Archipelago.
There is a specimen from Kickerten Island, that was collected by J. Dewey
Soper on 29 July, 1924 (CAN 65399). It was annotated by Polunin (1936) as S.
stellaris var. comosa, “ad typicum”. In 1938, Porsild annotated the specimen
as S. foliolosa. No other specimens that might be S. stellaris are known from
the Arctic Islands. It should be looked for in wet mossy areas of Baffin
Island. As the east coast of Baffin Island has been relatively well collected,
S. stellaris is treated as an excluded taxon at this time. (385) There is a
photograph at CAN of a collection housed at Kew that was collected before
1842. It is from Kickerten Island and may be the single record mapped by
Porsild (1957) for this taxon in the Arctic Archipelago. There is a specimen
from Kickerten Island, that was collected by J. Dewey Soper on 29 July, 1924
(CAN 65399). It was annotated by Polunin (1936) as S. stellaris var. comosa,
“ad typicum”. In 1938, Porsild annotated the specimen as S. foliolosa. No
other specimens that might be S. stellaris are known from the Arctic Islands.
It should be looked for in wet mossy areas of Baffin Island. As the east coast
of Baffin Island has been relatively well collected, S. stellaris is treated
as an excluded taxon at this time. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387)
Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406)
Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Dilleniales. (413)
Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419)
Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (424) Morphological data not coded. (426) Not
accepted in this study. (431) Code used for graphics files: sxsxst.


Saxifraga tenuis <(Wahlenb.) H. Sm. ex Lindm.>

      (2) Saxifragaceae, saxifrage family. (8) =Saxifraga nivalis L. var.
tenuis Wahlenb. . (384) Name used in Porsild (1957). Here treated as S.
nivalis var. tenuis Wahlenb. following Polunin (1940). Ourpreliminary study
found insufficient evidence for treating the taxon as a distinct species.
(385) Name used in Porsild (1957). Here treated as S. nivalis var. tenuis
Wahlenb. following Polunin (1940). Our preliminary study found insufficient
evidence for treating the taxon as a distinct species. (386) Subclass
Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order
Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order
Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder
Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's Order Saxifragales. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (426) Not accepted in this study. (431) Code used for graphics files:
sxsxte.


Saxifraga tricuspidata <Rothb.>

      (1) Prickly saxifrage, three-toothed saxifrage. (2) Saxifragaceae,
saxifrage family. (4) Skr. Kjobenhavnske Slesk. Laerd. Vidensk. 10: 446. 1770.
(8) Leptasea tricuspidata (Rottb.) Haw. (11) Plants 5-15(-25) cm high. (14)
Plants perennial herbs <with a tendency to become a sub-shrub>. (15) Plants
tufted, or cushion-like, or matted <often forming large, flat cushions>. (18)
Taproot present <as the primary root from a tuft of stems>. (32) Stems erect,
or decumbent. (36) Stems glabrous, or sparsely hairy <with a few gland tipped
hairs near the inflorescence>. (57) Petioles absent. (82) Leaves evergreen, or
marcescent. (83) Leaves distributed along the stems. (84) Leaves alternate
<often reddish in colour>. (86) Leaves heterophyllous. (87) Leaves simple
<vegetative leaves rigid, leathery, cuneate-spathulate with 1-3 prickly,
tooth-like lobes at the apex, upper leaves on the flowering stems, linear,
entire>. (88) Leaves lobed, or not lobed. (89) Leaves 0.5-2 cm long. (90)
Leaves 1-4(-6) mm wide. (93) Leaf blades linear, or oblanceolate, or
spatulate. (97) Leaf blades leathery. (105) Leaf blades glabrous. (126) Leaf
blades flat. (132) Leaf margins with hairs. (134) Conspicuous hydathodes
present <3 per leaf; each hydathode opens on the upper side of the leaf
margin, and does not secrete lime>. (135) Flowering stems with leaves <leaves
on the flowering stems linear, entire>. (136) Flowering stems hairy <with
sparse glandular hairs, seen at 10x>. (145) Flowering stem 1-8 cm long. (151)
Inflorescence cymose. (160) Inflorescence 0.5-2.5 cm long. (192) Flowers per
inflorescence 3-10. (193) Flowers medium-sized, 5-15 mm in diameter or length.
(255) Sepals 5. (256) Sepals free. (258) Sepals green, or purple. (259) Sepals
glabrous <and somewhat ciliate>. (266) Petals 5. (267) Petals free. (268)
Petals white <creamy>, or yellow <when dried>. (269) Petals with contrasting
markings <yellowish orange-red or reddish-brown or deep purple dots>. (270)
Petals ovate. (271) Petals unlobed. (272) Petals 6-7 mm long. (276) Corolla
cup-like. (277) Stamens 10. (278) Stamens free. (295) Carpels 2. (296) Ovary
superior. (308) Styles free. (309) Styles 2. (313) Stigmas per style 1. (316)
Placentation axile. (317) Ovules <many>. (325) Fruit a capsule. (326) Fruit
ovoid <with prominent styles>. (327) Fruit 4-6.5 mm long. (328) Fruit 3-4.5 mm
wide. (330) Fruit dry. (331) Fruit dehiscent. (332) Fruit brown, or red. (334)
Fruit calyx persisting. (335) Fruit styles persisting. (356) Seeds <many>.
(357) Seeds 0.6-0.9 mm long. (358) Seeds brown. (359) Seeds smooth, or ridged
<seen at 40x>. (360) 2n = 26. (364) North American. (365) Arctic. (366)
Wide-ranging in the Arctic Islands. (367) Common <often forming vigorous loose
mats in suitable situations, and often of considerable ecological importance>.
(371) Arctic Islands: Baffin, Devon, Ellesmere, Axel Heiberg, Parry Islands,
Cornwallis, Banks, Victoria, Prince of Wales, Somerset, and King William.
(374) Rocky sites <dry gravel areas>. (380) The flowers and the inflorescences
droop before opening, but are erect during expansion. Nectar is secreted
abundantly by the thick yellow base of the ovary. It is present as small drops
even before the anthers open, and the secretion is continued for a very long
time, even in old flowers. Protandry occurs, but anthers and stigmas are
fertile throughout the greater part of the life of the flower.
Self-pollination appears to take place. Fruit has been observed to ripen in
West Greenland and the Canadian Arctic. The capsules are stiffly errect and
gradually split open with the onset of winter, but the opening remains
relatively small. When the wind reaches a certain speed the capsules vibrate
and the seeds gradually shake out. Many seed are not shed until the winds have
packed the snow into a surface as smooth and hard as an asphalt road. Since
the seed are shed only when the wind is blowing strongly, many of them are
carried great distances in a single gale Saville, 1968. (381) Variations in
the height and the vigour of mats of plants of this species are dependent on
local environmental conditions and indicative of the harshness of the
environment. The northernmost record is Ellesmere Island, Ravine Pond, 82°30'N
(CAN). (382) Used as bedding for raising husky puppies as the prickles on the
leaves are believed to cause the pads on the feet to toughen up, so that, as
adult dogs, they are less likely to need booties when being used to pull
komatiks (personal communication, Judith Farrow, 1986). (384) Galloe (1910)
considered this species a xerophyte based on the habitats where it grows and
the internal anatomy of leaves. This species is not known outside of North
America and Greenland. Polunin (1940) stated that “the vast majority of the
specimens from our area have the leaves tricuspidate, and so belong to the
typical form. Some however, especially when growing in exposed habitats, have
most of their leaves lacking these conspicuous lateral teeth, and a few from
widely separate parts of our area have all the leaves subentire”. Polunin
(1938) recognized a forma subintegrifolia (Abrom.) Polunin but this was not
taken up by Porsild (1957). Polunin (1940) stated that “S. tricuspidata varies
little in our area, except in luxuriance. Thus the axes may sometimes be only
5 cm high, although generally they rise to double this height and sometimes
exceed 15 cm. Such luxuriant specimens growing in the most favourable
situations may form extensive mats, especially in the south. The plant
generally looks reddish, but in damp and shaded crevices there occur
lengthened green forms, which are usually sterile”. No reason for maintaining
the forma recognized by Polunin (1940) has been found. (385) Polunin (1940)
recognized two taxa as occuring in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. One of
these is a forma that was not maintained by Porsild (1957, 1964), Porsild and
Cody (1980), or this treatment. (386) Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's
Superorder Rosiflorae. (394) Dahlgren's Order Saxifragales. (406) Cronquist's
Subclass Dilleniidae. (410) Cronquist's Order Dilleniales. (413) Takhtajan's
Subclass Rosidae. (414) Takhtajan's Superorder Rosanae. (419) Takhtajan's
Order Saxifragales. (431) Code used for graphics files: sxsxtr.


Scrophulariaceae <A.L. de Jussieu>

      (1) Fernweed family. (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (386)
Subclass Dicotyledonae. (387) Dahlgren's Superorder Nymphaeiflorae. (402)
Dahlgren's Order Scrophulariales. (406) Cronquist's Subclass Asteridae. (412)
Cronquist's Order Scrophulariales. (413) Takhtajan's Subclass Asteridae. (414)
Takhtajan's Superorder Laminae. (420) Takhtajan's Order Scrophulariales. (421)
3000 species. (422) 280 genera. (423) Genera in study region: Bartsia,
Castilleja, Euphrasia, Pedicularis,Veronica. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics files: sc.


Bartsia alpina <L.>

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (428) Possibly 5 record southern Baffin Island. (431) Code used for
graphics files: scbaal.


Castilleja pallida <(L.) Spreng.> subsp. elegans <(Ostenf.) Pennell>

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (428) Single record Baffin Island. (431) Code used for graphics files:
sccapa.


Castlileja septentrinonalis <Lindl.>

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (428) Check records possibly on Victoria. (431) Code used for graphics
files: sccase.


Euphrasia arctica <L.>

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (428) Possibly 5 southrn Baffin Island. (431) Code used for graphics
files: sceual.


Pedicularis arctica R. Br.

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (8) =Pedicularis langsdorfii
subsp. arctica (R. Br.) Pennell. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428)
Possibly 20. (431) Code used for graphics files: scpdar.


Pedicularis capitata <Adams>

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (8) =Pedicularis nelsonii R. Br.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Widespread - possibly 50. (431) Code
used for graphics files: scpdca.


Pedicularis flammea <L.>

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (8) Pedicularis albertae Hultén
Pedicularis oederi Vahl ex Hornem. var. albertae (Hultén) Boivin. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (428) Possibly 20. (431) Code used for graphics
files: scpdfl.


Pedicularis hirsuta <L.>

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (8) NO synonymy in Kartesz
(1994),. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Possibly 30. (431) Code
used for graphics files: scpdhi.


Pedicularis labradorica Wirsing

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (8) Var. labradorica Pediularis
euphrasiodes Steph. ex Willd. (424) Morphological data not coded. (428)
Possibly 5. (431) Code used for graphics files: scpelb.


Pedicularis langsdorfii subsp. arctica (R. Br.) Pennell

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (8) =Pedicularis arctica R. Br.
(424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files:
scpdln.


Pedicularis lapponica L.

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (8) No synonymy in Kartesz
(1994). (424) Morphological data not coded. (428) Possibly 10-15. (431) Code
used for graphics files: scpdag.


Pedicularis sudetica <Willd.>

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (8) Five subspecies recognized in
Kartesz (1994). (424) Morphological data not coded. (431) Code used for
graphics files: scpdsu.


Vernonica alpina <L.> var. unalaschcensis <C.& S.>

      (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (424) Morphological data not
coded. (428) Single Baffin Island record. (431) Code used for graphics files:
Scveal.


Sparganiaceae <Rudolphi>

      (1) Bur-reed family. (2) Scrophulariaceae, fernweed family. (424)
Morphological data not coded. (425) Family. (431) Code used for graphics
files: sp.


Sparganium hyperboreum <Laest>

      (2) Sparganiaceae. (8) No synonym in Kartesz (1994). (424) Morphological
data not coded. (431) Code used for graphics files: spsphy.
